# The Buddhist Praying-Wheel.

### A Collection of Material bearing upon the Symbolism of the Wheel and circular Movements in Custom and Religious Ritual.

## By William Simpson.

### R. I., M. R. A. S., F. R. G. S., Hon. Associate R. I. B. A., etc.

'Instruct the planets in what orbs to run,  
Correct old Time, and regulate the Sun;  
Go soar with Plato to the empyreal sphere,  
To the first good, first perfect, and first fair!  
Or tread the mazy round his followers trod,  
And quitting sense call imitating God;  
As Eastern priests in giddy circles run,  
And turn their heads to imitate the Sun.'  
Pope, _Essay on Man_.

## London, 1896.

### MacMillan and Co., Ltd.

---

# [Introductory.](#introductory-1)

# [Chapter 1. --- Among the Lamas.](#chapter-1-----among-the-lamas-1)

# [Chapter 2. --- The Precious Wheel.](#chapter-2-----the-precious-wheel-1)

# [Chapter 3. --- The Wheel in Indian Buddhism.](#chapter-3-----the-wheel-in-indian-buddhism-1)

# [Chapter 4. --- The Wheel in the Brahmanic System.](#chapter-4-----the-wheel-in-the-brahmanic-system-1)

# [Chapter 5. --- The Solar Origin.](#chapter-5-----the-solar-origin-1)

# [Chapter 6. --- The Swastika.](#chapter-6-----the-swastika-1)

...

---

'The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it.' --- Ps. 19.

---

'That day, as other solemn days, they spent  
In song and dance about the sacred hill;  
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere  
Of planets, and of fixed in all her wheels  
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,  
Eccentric, intervolved, yet regular,  
Then most, when most irregular they seem;  
And in their motions harmony divine.'  
_Paradise Lost_, Bk. 5.

'He, who hath the power,   
Had with another sun bedecked the sky.  
Her eyes fast fixed on the eternal wheels  
Beatrice stood unmoved.'  
Dante, _Par._ Canto 1.

'Weave a circle round him thrice,  
And close your eyes with holy dread,  
For he on honey dew hath fed,  
And drank the milk of paradise.'  
Coleridge, _Kubla Khan_.

---

_Athenian Stranger_... the soul then directs all things in heaven, and earth, and sea by her movements... If, my friend, we say that the whole path and movement of heaven, and of all that is therein, is by nature akin to the movement and revolution and calculation of mind, and proceeds by kindred laws, then, as is plain, we must say that the best soul takes care of the world and guides it along the good path.

_Cleinias._ True.

_Ath._ But if the world moves wildly and irregularly, then the evil soul guides it... Of these two kinds of motion, that which moves in one place must move about a centre like globes made in a lathe, and is most entirely akin and similar to the circular movement of mind.

_Cle._ What do you mean?

_Ath._ In saying that both mind and the motion which is in one place move in the same and like manner, in and about the same, and in relation to the same, and according to one proportion and order, and are like the motion of a globe, we have invented a fair image, which does no discredit to our ingenuity.

_Cle._ It does us great credit.

_Ath._ And the motion of the other sort which is not after the same manner, nor in the same, nor about the same, nor in relation to the same, nor in one place, nor in order, nor according to any rule or proportion, may be said to be akin to senselessness and folly.

_Cle._ That is most true.

_Ath._ Then, after what has been said, there is no difficulty in distinctly stating that since soul carries all things round, either the best soul or the contrary must of necessity carry round and order and arrange the revolution of the heaven.

_Cle._ And judging by what has been said, Stranger, there would be impiety in asserting that any but the most perfect soul or souls carries round the heavens.

Plato, _Laws_, Jowett's translation, 10. 897.

---

# Introductory.

The Buddhist "Praying-Wheel" --- the name by which this instrument of worship is known --- has been looked upon by most writers as a strange freak of superstition, and as being quite exceptional as a form of ritualism. Carlyle, with an air of contempt, defined it as the "Rotatory Calabash." Travellers have generally talked of the grinding of prayers in a mill as a good subject for jokes. No one appears to have applied himself to study or comprehend this particular form of worship, so very little seems to be known about it. It so chanced that I spent the hot seasons of 1860 and 1861 in the Himalayas, and in both years I passed over the boundary into Tibet, visited the Lamaseries, and made sketches of the so-called Praying-Wheels. I also bought one of the small hand-cylinders, and learned the proper manner of using it. On my return home I gave some attention to the subject, and discovered that the name "Praying-Wheel" was a misnomer; and my investigations led me to the conclusion that the circular movement was symbolical of the solar motion, --- or it might be of the great celestial rotation as it appears above. This result completely changed the whole aspect of the subject. I also saw the similarity of the circular movement of the wheel with circular movements in ritual and custom in India and other parts of the world, and particularly with the Celtic _deisul_. I was then led to write an article on the subject, which appeared in _Good Words_ for December 1867; and, so far as my knowledge goes, this was the first effort that had been made to work out the meaning of the Praying-Wheel, and its conclusions have now been fully confirmed.

Since then, in travelling and in reading, I have made notes of whatever seemed to be related to this subject, and the following pages are the result. No pretence shall be assumed on my part that this is an exhaustive treatment; on the contrary, it must be understood that the matter given here is only what I have chanced to come upon. There are many blanks that have yet to be filled in, and I have no doubt that others will accomplish this, who may take up the subject in the future. This, I feel sure, will be done, because the circular movements are intimately related to many questions in comparative mythology; and they are also closely connected with the field of inquiry to which the students of Folk-Lore are directing their attention. My own hope is that what is here given will be found to be at least an interesting chapter in the history and development of one form of ritualism and custom.

My acknowledgments are due to many friends for kindly assistance in this work. My thanks are specially owing to M. Henri Gaidoz, Directeur à l'École des Hautes Études in Paris. His work, _Le Dieu Gaulois du Soleil, et le Symbolisme de la Roue_, treats most ably on one branch of the subject in which my opportunities of acquiring knowledge have been of the slightest; and I am indebted to him for permission to make any use of the valuable information his book contains, and also for the advantage of copying some of his illustrations, which it will be found I have freely availed myself of. I can recommend the production of M. Gaidoz to those who wish to study the particulars of the subject more fully, because he has dealt in a much more complete manner with the symbolism of the wheel in Western Europe than I have done. I may at the same time express my satisfaction in finding an ally in this savant, who has arrived independently at conclusions so similar to my own upon the solar symbolism of the wheel. I also owe thanks to Miss Gordon Cumming, who placed some of her drawings at my disposal. This lady, it ought to be mentioned, has in her travels collected a large amount of information on the wheel and its symbolism. Professor Rhys Davids, from whom I have taken several extracts, has aided me with his counsel and help in some Sanscrit words; and has also most kindly read over and corrected the proofs of the Buddhist and Brahmanical portions of these pages, which is in itself a guarantee that that portion of the work is not likely to contain any very serious blunder in it. Dr. A. S. Murray and Dr. Budge of the British Museum have also assisted me by answering questions and supplying information. Robert Brown junior was at considerable trouble in writing to me about the Greek Chorus, --- on which I have not ventured to say much, as it would require one better informed on the matter than myself. This is one of the blanks that has yet to be filled in, --- to which I would also add dancing in general. The Rev. Dr. A. Löwy, with his almost inexhaustible stores of knowledge of his own people, has been most kind in giving me information about the Jews. Dr. Chaplain was so obliging as to write to Jerusalem to one of his many friends there about some details; and the answer, written I think by a Jew, is given in the Additional Notes. I am indebted to the Rev. Richard Conway for his valuable assistance in relation to the rites of the Latin Church.

I have many friends to thank that I have troubled with questions; the curious thing being --- what I have found in my own case --- how uncertain after years, in some instances even months, the mind becomes about small details. My questions have generally been about the particular direction of turning movements, and the difficulty has been for the memory to recall with certainty how the movement took place. If errors of fact on points such as these should chance to have crept in to what I have recorded, I can only assure the reader it has been from no absence of desire on my part to be accurate.

It was only when the sheets of this work were going through the press that a friend called my attention to the passage from Plato which fronts the beginning of this Introduction. The words are placed there, because on reading them I felt as if they had been the text which I had been expounding. Let those who chance to read the following pages turn back afterwards to what the great Philosopher has said, and they will then understand how appropriate the passage really is, and how completely he had grasped the theory of the wheel and its symbolism as they have been described in this book.

# Chapter 1. --- Among the Lamas.

In the summer of 1860 being at Simla, I, with a friend, started for Chini, a village in the Sutlej valley, about sixteen marches inland among the hills. The attractions of this place were the fine view of the snowy range, and the escape from the rains, which are usually very heavy at Simla in June and August. We remained two months at Chini, and became intimately acquainted with the people. They are of the Aryan type, but polyandry is a custom among them, and their religious rites can scarcely be classed as Brahmanical. Caste does not exist, and everything is rude and primitive in the extreme. We learned that just across the range of hills that formed the watershed on the right bank of the Sutlej, the people there are known as _Bot log_, or Tibetans; this means that they are Turanian, or Mongolian, in type; and that among them we should find Lamas and nuns, and see their monasteries, Praying-Wheels, and whatever belonged to their peculiar system. An excursion of a few days enabled us to see the villages of Leepee and Kanum; and luckily we found in these places all that we expected. For a couple of rupees I was able to buy a small hand Praying-Wheel (Fig. 1), and the Lama initiated me into the proper way of turning it, and the right use of the _Mantra_ during the performance. This was my first contact with Buddhism, and the beginning of my knowledge of the Dharma-Chakra, or Praying-Wheel.

[Fig. 1. --- Small hand Praying-Wheel.]()

I spent next summer in the Himalayas, and arranged to pass through that part of Tibet known as Ladak, going over the high passes to the Indus, and returning by way of Kashmir. Starting from Mussoorie I went to the sources of the Ganges and the Jumna; then crossed over the Roopin Pass, --- which is 15,000 feet above the sea, --- into the Buspa Valley, crossed the Sutlej near Chini, and went on to Leepee, where I had been the previous season; the route led through Kanum, and on to Soonum.

As I entered the village, my ear caught the sound of a bell tinkling at regular intervals; there was some difficulty in climbing up to a window, through which I had an obscure glimpse of a large cylinder and a solitary monk sitting turning it, every turn causing the bell to sound. The place was a monastery, and I had some trouble in finding my way in, but at last I gained admittance, and made a sketch of the room, including the cylinder and the monk. The cylinder might be about nine feet in height and four feet in diameter, with an iron spindle at each end; on the lower one there was a crank to which a string was attached, and by simply pulling this the machine went slowly round. It was gaudily painted with many bright colours, in which ornaments and Tibetan letters formed the designs; the walls of the room were also decorated with paintings of Buddhist figures (see Frontispiece). In addition to these there was a large figure modelled in plaster and painted with many colours, the name of which I learned was Tchaypungmay. A piece of red cloth, the same as the Lamas wear, was hung over its shoulders, partly like a robe and partly like a shawl. The monk who was turning the wheel wore the usual red dress of the Lamas in that locality, yellow being the colour in other parts of Tibet. Yellow is the colour worn in Ceylon and China, and it was the colour in India. The old accounts of converting new regions to Buddhism describe the success of the missionaries by saying that "the land glittered with the yellow robes." The followers of the Dalai-Lama and the Tashi-Lama wear the yellow dress, which is distinctive of the sect known as Gelukpas; while the red dress is the costume of the Dukpas, and their spiritual head is the Dharma Rajah.

The Lama who was moving the wheel did not seem to be annoyed at my rather unceremonious entrance; on the contrary, he appeared to be pleased at his operations being taken notice of. It so chanced that I had some coins in my pocket, and on presenting him with some of these his delight seemed to be great. Native coins are, or were at that time, rough, unshapely pieces of copper very rudely stamped. Those I had given him were the "Coompany-ke-pice," from the Government mint, and they had the Queen's head on them as perfect as on our money at home. As the man, in that out-of-the-way spot, had perhaps never seen such objects before, he gazed with an expression of surprise and wonder upon them, and my guess at the moment was that he took the head of Her Majesty for a Devi, or goddess. So deep was his interest, he forgot to keep the "Precious Wheel of the Law" in motion. After a close inspection he wrapped them up carefully in a part of his dress, and commenced to turn the wheel. That did not continue long, for he stopped it again, unrolled the coins to gaze upon them once more. When I left he was sitting looking at them with evident delight. The probability is that the coins would be placed on one of their altars, and that the Queen would become, in that Lamasery at least, a Buddhist deity, and receive suitable adoration. I was led to this conclusion afterwards from what I saw in other temples, where I found that European articles had been picked up by the monks and placed among their figures of gods on their shrines. In one temple I saw two brandy bottles so honoured; and in a monastery at Lamayuru the monks pointed with pride to a gin bottle on their altar, which they seemed to prize highly from the label, which shone in gold and bright colours, and prominent upon it were the figure of a cat and the words "Old Tom."

Later in the day I found another temple in the same village with three large cylinders, all of them somewhat similar to the first. On the outside of the temple there was a long row of small cylinders, each about the size of an oyster-barrel; those were placed in the wall at such a height that any one in passing could turn them with the hand. At the monastery of Hemis, near Leh, I saw a similar row of cylinders. It was at Soonum I saw for the first time these cylinders turned by means of water-power. A rude erection had been made over the stream with recesses to hold three barrels; one was empty, the wheel in another was out of order and motionless, but the third went steadily on, revolving day and night. Those cylinders were a little over three feet in height, and the wooden axle was continued downwards, and pieces of wood were fixed to it, producing a horizontal paddle-wheel, and the water dashing on it caused the circular motion. In front was the place where the villagers took their water for domestic purposes, and it is a probable conjecture that it acquired some special virtue from having turned the "Precious Wheel" (see Fig. 2).

[Fig. 2. --- Praying-barrels propelled by water-wheels, at Soonum. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

It was some marches after that before I chanced to see another of the uses to which the wheel could be applied. We had passed Dunker, and were at the last village before passing the Parung Law, one of the highest passes in the Himalayas, being 19,000 ft. above the sea. The place was named Kiwar; there two men appeared. I assumed they were itinerant Lamas that had come out on a begging trip. They had a small box which held some brass cups, and a small brass figure of _Shakya-Thubba_, as they call Buddha. Those were placed on the top of the box, so as to form a simple altar, and two or three pictures were hung upon the wall behind. One of the men had a mask on his face made of a black coloured cloth, ornamented with cowrie shells. He had a pair of cymbals, which he clashed as he danced before the altar. The other man had a strange head-dress formed of strips of coloured cloth that partly covered his face. He stood by the altar with a small Praying-Wheel in his hand, which he kept turning, and at the same time, in a low monotonous voice, he muttered what I took to be prayers, or the words of some kind of religious service, in which I could often hear the sentence --- "Aum! Mani Padme, hung!" This is the _Mantra_ of the Praying-Wheel, and will be explained further on. The villagers made offerings in the form of grain, which was laid down in front of the altar.

After crossing the Parung Law we came to the Tchoomoreree Lake, the surface of which is about 15,000 feet above the sea. At this great altitude there were no houses or villages, but at one end of the lake there was, at a place called Korzok, a large Lamasery, with about forty Lamas in it. I made some sketches in that place, and as the use of the wheel there was like what I saw in other monasteries, a description of it will serve for all. These establishments are not remarkable for cleanliness, neither are the Lamas. They have very long services, so tea is served out to them. Tea in Tibet is a very different concoction from what it is in Europe. I have seen it made by our Tibetan [day labourers] in camp. A large pot is put on the fire --- a teapot it may be called, of course, but not in our sense of that word; it was a large iron pot, such as soup would be prepared in. In this tea is made, with butter or grease of some kind, and a few vegetables are added, if they can be procured, so that it is in reality a kind of thin soup. Each man in this region carries a small wooden bowl, somewhere in his bosom --- that is, between his dress and his skin --- and this vessel is brought out whenever tea has to be taken. At the Korzok monastery I had a serious trial to undergo that had not been calculated upon. The Lamas were at their service, which was a long one, and a younger brother came round with a supply of tea for them. As I was sitting sketching among them they wished to be polite, and one of the cups was produced, most probably from its usual receptacle, and some of the tea was poured into it for me. These Lamas had been so kind and genial in every way, I felt it would have been very bad manners to have refused the offered beverage. All the details given above were perfectly well known to me, and to accept the bowl and put it to my lips required some resolution, but I did it, and managed to look pleased after accomplishing it.

The temple in most of these Lamaseries has a recess or apse at one end, in which is placed a figure of Shakya-Thubba, or Buddha, or of some Bodhisatva; and a large opening in the roof allows the principal light of the place to fall upon it and the altar, which stands in front. The Lamas sit in two lines, one on each side of the building. Each Lama has a small desk or stool, on which the books with the service are placed. They have drums, cymbals, and long trumpets. These last are of brass, and very long, as much as seven or eight feet in length. They rest on two low stands, the mouthpiece being close to the Lama that uses it; and at the part of the service when its music is required he lifts the one end only and performs. The service is in printed books, which are in form like those of Ceylon --- that is, the leaves are a series of long strips, enclosed within two boards and tied with a string. In Ceylon the leaves are the dried leaves of a plant, and books are written; whereas in Tibet paper is in use, and books are printed --- from blocks, I presume, as in China. There are three highly-ritualistic instruments which are used by the Lamas. At this time, so long after my visit among them, I do not feel sure whether every monk had them, or if it was only some of those that may have held higher rank. The first of these is a small hand-bell; these are of brass, and ornamented with Buddhist symbols. What signification they attached to this article I did not learn. It is not peculiar to the Buddhists; almost every Hindu temple has one. They are carved on Hindu architecture, and the Bull, Nandi, the _wahan_ of Siva, is always represented with one hanging by a cord or chain round his neck. It is a very ancient symbol, but I have never as yet heard any suggestion as to its origin or meaning. The Lamas call it _Drilbu_,* and it is rung repeatedly at different parts of the service. The second article is called in Tibetan a _Dorjé_, and has been described as a "sceptre" (see Fig. 3). It is understood to be the same as the _vajra_, or "thunderbolt," of the Brahmans, which is the _trisula_, or trident, and is the sceptre of Siva, --- temples of Siva have the trident placed upon the _sikhara_ or spire.* The Tibetan _Dorjé_ does not at first sight suggest any resemblance to the trident, but it is in reality a group of two or four tridents combined, and as the outer prongs come round and meet at the point of the central one, the whole has somewhat the appearance of a crown. That this is a correct explanation, I have a sufficient evidence in possessing a Buddhist _Dorjé_ in which the prongs are not repeated, and it is simply a trident. Both ends of the instrument, which is about six inches long, and made of brass, have the prongs, and the space between is the handle by which it is held, which is done repeatedly during the service. What those Lamas understood as the meaning of holding this sceptre in their hands at particular times my want of the language prevented me from learning. The connection of the wheel and the thunderbolt is a very curious one, and as it is found in other places, it will be often referred to again in these pages.

[Fig. 3. --- Dorjé, or Vajra.]()

*) _Dril-bu_, a "little bell," Cunningham's _Ladak_, p. 373.

*) The _Trisūla_, or Trident, is a very ancient symbol, and appears to have been known in most parts of the Eastern world. There are also symbols which bear a strong resemblance to it, such as the _fleur-de-lis_, which is supposed to have been brought from the East. A considerable collection of these forms will be found in a paper on the "Trisula Symbol," which I read to the Royal Asiatic Society, and published in the _Journal_ for 1890, p. 299.

The third ritualistic instrument is what I have, in the meantime, called the "Praying-Wheel"; and the description of which will be given further on. It lay on the desk before the Lama, along with the _Drilbu_ and _Dorjé_, and was at times taken up and whirled round. I often noticed that while the Wheel was turned in the right hand, the _Dorjé_ was held in the left. Sometimes none of the three articles would be used, but they would lie on the desk for some time. Not being able to follow the service, it was impossible for me to understand why or when the performance with them was necessary. So far it may be explained that, according to the Buddhist doctrine of _Karma_, or good works, the more a wheel is turned, the more _Karma_, or merit, is acquired by the person who causes it to turn; and from this it may be assumed that in the case of the cylinders propelled by water-wheels, the constant turning would add to the merit of those connected with their erection. The doctrine of _Karma_, which is so prominent in Buddhist teaching, thus explains the motive in the mind of the person turning the wheel, but the symbolism belonging to it is a separate matter, and has yet to be dealt with.

[Fig. 4. --- Praying-Barrels at Kalsi, on the Indus. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

The villagers in some instances use the wheel. This I know from a man who at one place came to my camp, and while I sketched him he sat turning his hand-cylinder. As this was the only one I saw, my impression is that few of the laity --- if that is the right term to apply to the non-Lama part of the population --- are in the habit of using the small hand ones, but then there are larger ones erected in many cases for what may be supposed to be public use. In the village of Kalsi, on the Indus, there was a _Chhod-Ten_ --- the Tibetan form of the Indian stūpa --- in the base of which there were two cylinders, about three or four feet in height; those were for the villagers to turn with their hands when they chanced to pass (see Fig. 4). The row of small barrels at Soonum I have already described; and I saw a similar row in the Hemis monastery, on the Indus, near Leh, which was no doubt intended to be turned by all those that chanced to pass, whether monks or laymen (Fig. 5).

[Fig. 5. --- Praying-wheels in the Hemis Lamasery, on the Indus. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

The only other place where I saw a wheel turned by water-power was at Ghia (see Fig. 6); that one, by some arrangement, gave a click at every turn. My tent chanced to be near, and on going to bed I could hear it. I fell asleep listening to the click, and it was the first sound I heard again in the morning when I wakened. I add an illustration of another wheel at Ghia, in which I could only see the water-wheel beneath (see Fig. 7). It was not my fortune to see wheels driven by windmills. Huc, if I remember right, mentions them; and Bonvalot, one of the latest travellers in Tibet, saw them.* It seems to be a matter of no consequence by what means these cylinders are turned; the _Karma_ can be realised if only the circular motion can be produced. In some cases the hot air from fires is thus utilised. Huc says that "the Tartars suspend them over the fireplace... the movement itself is effected by the thorough draught occasioned by the openings at the top of the tent."* To this may be added the statement of the Rev. James Gilmour, a missionary, who spent a good many years among the Mongols. In describing Wu T'ai Shan, a great place of pilgrimage, he visited one of the important Lamas, and in his room, "near the ceiling, just above the charcoal fire, hung a paper cylinder, like an inverted wheel of life, which kept constantly turning. That was also a praying-wheel, and was kept in motion by the hot air ascending from the fire."* It is evident from these examples that, if smoke-jacks could be introduced into Tibet, they would be highly prized in every household as a means of acquiring _Karma_.

[Fig. 6. --- Praying-Barrel at Ghia. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

*) _Across Thibet_, by Gabriel Bonvalot, vol. 2. p. 143.

*) _Travels in Tartary, Thibet, and China_, by M. Huc, vol. 1. chap. 9.

*) _Among the Mongols_, by the Rev. James Gilmour, M. A., p. 147. Gilmour describes a tope at Wu T'ai Shan, and round its base "were mounted more than three hundred praying-wheels, which the worshippers set in motion one after the other as they passed round, p. 146.

In February 1894, Mr. W. Woodville Rockhill gave an account of his travels through Tibet to the Royal Geographical Society. In describing some Tibetans near Kokonor, he says: "... The family sleep on a Chinese _kang_, or stone bed, headed by a big Tibetan cooking-stove where the tea-cauldron boils, and over which is a prayer-wheel turning in the heated air as it escapes through a big hole in the roof."* And further he adds, --- "And below the house, in a log hutch built over the brook, a big prayer-barrel is kept turning ever by the water as it dashes by."*

[Fig. 7. --- Praying-Wheel at Ghia. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

*) _The Geographical Journal_, May 1894, p. 363.

*) _Ibid._

Another peculiar form of this ritualistic machine is a very large cylinder filled with books --- books of prayer, or religious works, we may suppose. These wheels are in temples, and visitors turn them as a religious performance. Miss Gordon Cumming saw and sketched some of these in Japan. That lady calls them "Scripture-Wheels," --- "circulating libraries" might be suggested as a good name for them, --- and describes a very striking one she saw in the Asakusa temple at Tokio* (see Fig. 20). Mr. Gilmour saw one at Wu T'ai Shan, which he states was "about sixty feet high, containing shrines, images, books, and prayers." This one was so large, and had such a weight in it to move, that "two or three together go down to the cellar, lay hold on the hand-spokes, and with a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together, round goes the wheel."* According to his account, those who turn this ponderous cylinder believe that they acquire as much merit by the act as if they read all the books, repeated the prayers, and knocked their heads on the ground before all the gods whose images are enshrined in the wheel. Mr. Gilmour is probably quite right in thus describing the thoughts of those who go through such performances; but Dr. Edkins gives an explanation of these ponderous Scripture-Wheels, which is much more in keeping with the original Buddhist ideas on the subject. He quotes a Chinese phrase --- "Fa-lun-ch'ang-chwen_, 'The Wheel of the Law constantly revolves.' This refers to the unceasing proclamation by books and monks of the doctrines of Shakyamuni. The metaphor by which Buddhist preaching is called the revolving of the wheel is seen practically exemplified in the Praying-wheels of Mongolia, by the turning of which an accumulation of merit is obtained. So in China, the whole Buddhist library of several thousand volumes is placed in a large octagonal revolving bookcase, which is pushed round at the instance of the visitor."* Dr. Edkins also mentions the great wheel at Wu T'ai Shan: "The Chinese copy of the Gangur is inside it. The visitor sees the whole vast Wheel turning slowly from east to west. All praying-wheels turn in the direction in which the sun moves."* The subject of this last sentence forms an important principle in connection with the wheel, which will be dealt with as we proceed.

*) The description and sketches of these Scripture-Wheels appeared in _Scribner's Monthly_, September 1881, p. 733.

*) _Among the Mongols_, p. 146.

*) _Chinese Buddhism_, by the Rev. Joseph Edkins, D. D., p. 266.

*) _Religion in China_, Edkins, p. 238. Dr. Edkins also mentions a similar Wheel at the Yung-ho-Kung in Peking; and that there was another in the Ling-yin monastery at Hangchow before the time of the Taiping rebellion.

Gerard mentions that in the monastery of Soongnum, --- Soonum, where I sketched the large Praying-Wheel, but unfortunately I did not chance to see the one Gerard describes --- there is at that place a library of books, procured from Lhása at a cost of 500 rupees. "At stated periods the Gelongs and Lamas assemble to read them; and on grand days there is exhibited an iron stand of five squares, one above the other, tapering to the top, which is illuminated with one hundred and eight lamps, and is made to revolve in the same direction as the cylinders." This description is not very definite, but it may be assumed that he means the books are placed on the stand and revolve with it.

It will convey some idea of the extent to which these Wheels are in use if we quote again from Mr. Gilmour's interesting book a description he gives of them on his visit to Urga in Mongolia. "In these temple premises, and at many street corners and busy places, are erected numerous Praying-Wheels, supposed to be filled inside, many of them decorated outside, and some of them almost literally covered all round, with prayers, the idea being that any devout believer who turns the wheel, by so doing acquires as much merit as if he or she had repeated all the prayers thus set in motion. These praying-cylinders seem to be seldom left at rest. In the quiet deserted-looking precincts of the temple may be heard the creaking of the rusty spindle, as it is turned in the unoiled socket by worshippers, who most likely have come from the country to perform their devotions at this great religious centre. Many, both Lamas and laymen, male and female, as they pass along the streets, lay hold of the inviting handle and give a turn to such praying-machines as they find standing in their path."*

*) _Among the Mongols_, pp. 134, 135.

The following is from Bonvalot's book; it refers to a monastery towards the south-eastern border of Tibet, thus showing how widespread the Praying-Wheel is in that region:--- "The principal attraction of the Dotou-Lama house is a series of prayer-mills. Beneath a gallery running almost entirely round the house are enormous bobbins composed of printed prayers, and transfixed by a long piece of wood, which is held in position by two beams. These bobbins are turned by hand, and as it is said that each is composed of 10,000 prayers, and as there are at least 100 of them, it is easy to see what an enormous quantity of prayers can be said in a walk round the building."* This writer made a wonderful journey across Tibet, but it is evident that he had not paid much attention to the construction or character of the "praying-mills." This description agrees perfectly with the rows of cylinders I saw at Soonum and at the Hemis monastery near Leh.

*) _Across Thibet_, by Gabriel Bonvalot, vol. 2. p. 170.

The small hand-wheels are made of brass. The one in my possession, of which an illustration is given (Fig. 1), is three inches long, and two and a half in diameter. I believe that the high functionaries in the Lama priesthood have them made of gold, and set round with precious stones. Many have the sacred Mantra engraved in Tibetan characters round the outside. My one chances to be without this. By means of a bit of leather and a link, two small bits of lead are attached to the outer periphery of the cylinder, and it is their weight that carries the whole round, which is done by a gentle motion of the hand. The one I have, although very rudely made, when the proper turn of the hand is given, revolves easily and smoothly. Along with the pieces of lead there is a sharp iron hook, by means of which, when the instrument is not in use, it can be hung on to the dress of the performer, where it can be readily caught again and twirled when a spare moment or two occurs. There is a small bell attached to the handle of this particular wheel, which, I think, is not generally the case with others that I have seen. Its purpose I do not know; it does tinkle at times when the cylinder is whirled. The large cylinder I saw at Soonum tinkled a bell at every turn. I have mentioned the bell as one of the prominent ritualistic articles in the Lama service. To this it may be added that the bell occupies an important position in Hindu worship, but its origin and purpose, so far as I can recollect, I never heard explained. There is one theory that is well enough known: it is, that, when the Hindu rings a bell at a temple, he does it to waken the god, so that he may be aware of the worship that is to be offered. This cannot possibly be the meaning of the bell. It may be added that the tinkling of a bell is not limited to the forms of Brahmanical or Buddhist worship.

Here I have given an account of the various forms of the wheel which I have chanced to see in my travels; descriptions have been added of other forms which did not come under my own observation.

# Chapter 2. --- The Precious Wheel.

I have employed the term "Praying-Wheel," --- and as it has become so well established, I may use the phrase still, --- but one of the purposes of this chapter will be to show that this does not convey a correct idea of the wheel. A marked distinction is at all times made between "praise" and "prayer"; and "Praising-Wheel" would be a title that comes much nearer to the true meaning. Although this name expresses to a certain extent the character of the wheel among the Lamas, still it is very far from conveying all the symbolism that belongs to it; but this will be better understood as we advance.

When travelling in Tibet, I understood from the Lamas that they called the wheel a _Mani_; but Cunningham,* who had better means of gaining correct information than I chanced to have, calls them _mani-chhos-khor_, which he translates "The Precious Religious Wheel." This must be a free translation, for _mani_ means a "jewel" or "gem." _Chhos-khor_, I assume, means "wheel." Huc and other writers give this as _Tchu-kor_; and as _Chakar_, a form of _Chakra_, is the ordinary word in Hindostani for "Wheel," I assume that it is a variant of that term. _Dharma-Chakra_ is the Sanscrit name, which is usually translated "Wheel of the Law," meaning the Law or Faith of Buddha.* In Buddhist books it has received a great many titles, such as "Wheel of Life and Death," "Wheel of Transmigration," "Wheel of Time," etc. "The Royal Chariot Wheel of the Truth," and "The Supreme Wheel of the Empire of Truth," are from a Pāli Sutta, translated by Professor Rhys Davids.* According to the same authority, _Dhamma-Kakka_ is the Pāli form of the name. In Siamese its name is "Phra Thamma Chak." Alabaster explains _Phra_ as "Holy"; _Thamma_ as "Dharma"; and _Chak_ as "Chakra."*

*) The late Sir Alexander Cunningham, son of Allan Cunningham the Poet. His work on _Ladak_ was published in 1854, when he was a brevet-major of Engineers. It is a book full of valuable details. Sir Alexander's service in India was, almost the whole of it, devoted to archæology. He was for many years the head of the Archæological Survey Department. His numerous books on the archæology of India, including the _Archæological Reports_, contain a vast mine of knowledge. He died in December 1893.

*) _Dharma_ (Pāli _Dhamma_) has been translated at times as "law," at times by the word "faith." Professor Rhys Davids says it is a word often most difficult to translate, and best rendered by "truth or righteousness." See his explanation at p. 51.

*) _Dhamma-Kakka-Ppavattana-Sutta_, 25. Sacred Books of the East, vol. 11. p. 153.
  
*) _The Wheel of the Law_, p. 169.

The real character of this symbolical instrument,--- I speak here of the Praying-Wheel as it is understood in Tibet, --- may be realised from the Mantra, which has been so often misrepresented as a prayer. A "Mantra" is a word common to both Brahmanism and Buddhism. It means any word, or combination of words, which may be used by way of invocation during an act of worship. For instance, "Halleluiah" and "Hosanna" would be classed by a Brahman as Mantras. The first chapter of the Koran or the Lord's Prayer would also be included. Any combination of words that may be regularly used for invocation or consecration, or terms used to produce magical results, would be considered Mantras, such as "Abracadabra," or "Hi! Presto! Fly, Jack, and begone!"

According to my information, the Praying-wheels, whatever may be their size, are filled with paper or cloth, on which is repeated, as many times as it can be written, a Mantra of the following words: "Aum! Mani Padme, hung!"*

The first word in this sentence is the _Aum_ or _Om_, which is so sacred among the Hindus that some will only repeat it without sound, and others only think of it. In the present case it may be understood in the sense of "Adoration," or "Reverence." _Mani_ means a "Jewel" or "Gem." _Padme_ is "in the Lotus"; and _hung_ is usually rendered by "Amen." The whole sentence would thus be, "Adoration to the Jewel in the Lotus, Amen!" The words are meant to be an expression of the highest devotion or reverence; nothing is asked or prayed for, and instead of calling these cylinders by the usual accepted name, they should, on the contrary, be called "Praising-Machines."

Before turning these wheels, the performer should repeat the Mantra, else he will derive no merit from it; while he is turning, he may repeat the words as often as possible, and at the end a repetition is necessary, or the whole of the performance will be useless. The wheel should be moved round in the direction that a person would go if he turned round an object with his right hand to the centre.* To turn the wheel in the other direction produces an evil result; and, if I mistake not, such a motion is believed to undo any merit that had been previously produced by turning it in the right manner. As I knew nothing of the language while in Tibet, I was unable to ask questions. On that account there are many details about these wheels, concerning which I should have wished to possess more information, but was unable to obtain it on the spot. One point was as to whether this circular motion was in imitation of the sun. I have already quoted from Dr. Edkins, that "all Praying-Wheels should turn in the direction in which the sun moves."* Many things in Chinese Buddhism came through Tibet, among these was the Wheel, so we may assume that this was the Tibetan theory regarding its movement.

*) Waddell, in his _Buddhism of Tibet_, p. 139, gives the last word of the Mantra as "hum."

*) As I shall have often in this work to describe the direction of circular movements, I intend to describe the two movements by saying that the one was with the right hand, and the other  with the left hand, to the centre. I adopt this because it appears to me to leave no doubt as to the direction of the motion.

*) _Religion in China_, p. 238.

The Tibetans construct long dikes of stone; Mani is also the name given to these. They vary from about six to twelve feet in width, and are about four or five feet in height, from which they slope upwards to a ridge in the centre, like the roof of a house. The length of these varies from a few feet to that of the very long one at Leh, which Cunningham measured, and found it to be 880 paces, or nearly half a mile.* The Lamas engrave on stone slabs the favourite Mantra, "Aum! Mani Padme, hung!" repeating the words as often as the size of the slab permits. These the people buy and lay on the sloping top of the Mani, for good luck in any undertaking they may be about to begin. Manis such as these are generally built on the public road, at the outskirts of the village, and any one passing, does so keeping them on the right hand. By observing this rule, a person going and coming back again is considered to have circumambulated the Mani; and he will have done so with his right hand to the centre, which is the same circular motion as the wheel.* This performance of going round sunwise will be seen, as we proceed, to have been one of the world-wide customs; in some places it is only a custom, while in others it is part of a religious observance.

*) _Ladak_, p. 378.

When the Prince of Wales was at Jummu the Maharajah of Kashmir had a party of Lamas brought there, and they performed one of their wild, grotesque, masked dances, which I witnessed at the time. Here is an account of it that appeared in one of the Indian papers, in which it will be seen that the whirling round was done in the same direction as that of the Praying-Wheels. The place was cleared and "the Lama orchestra came in. It was formed of the musicians who perform in the monasteries, and had four large brazen trumpets, about six or seven feet long, which gave forth a deep sound as if it were the grumble of an earthquake. There were four drums, their shape reminding one of the old traditional warming-pan, held on end, and beaten with a curiously bent drumstick. There were cymbals and other instruments producing a clashing noise. The Lamas with these articles came in and squatted down in a long row like sitting Buddhas, and a wild gust of sound from them ushered in the dancers, who came along jumping and whirling in the most outrageous costumes. One man carried an incense vessel, held in his hands with chains identically as it is carried in a Roman Catholic Church. One man had a hat in colour and shape resembling the comb of a cock, but most of them had huge wide-brimmed hats surmounted by tridents and all sorts of things like vanes and weathercocks, from which long strips of coloured silk hung down behind. The costumes were purely Chinese, the body of their dresses being similar to that worn by Mandarins, only that they had capes, aprons, and tags and rags of all kinds hanging upon them, which flew out as the dancers went round in their uncouth gambols. _After dancing in a circle for a short time, going round with the right shoulder to the centre, which is the same turn as the Praying-Wheel goes round_, they retired and very quickly came back again. The large broad-brimmed hats were wanting, and all the dancers had the heads of animals exactly like what we see in a pantomime; there were ox-heads, boar-heads, elephant-heads, also large grinning and laughing heads, painted in all tints. The jumping and whirling round was the same each time they changed their head-dresses. We were led to understand that symbolism was expressed in the costumes, the heads, and in all the various parts of this uncouth performance, but its meaning was not at all clear to our Western ideas."*

*) The following is a Hindu form of circumambulating, which bears a strong resemblance to walking along the Manis. "A pilgrim, for example, sets out from the source of the Ganges, at Gangotrī, and walks by the left bank of the river to its mouth, at Gangā-Sāgara; then, turning round, he proceeds by the right side back to Gangotrī, whence he departed. This is called Pradakshinā" (_Hinduism_, by Sir Monier Williams, p. 173). "Pradakshinā," it may be explained, means circumambulating.

According to Huc, the Mantra is known to the Tibetans as the "Mani"; this will explain why the name is given to the Wheel as well as to the dikes of stone. Huc says that this Mantra is not only in every one's mouth, but it is written everywhere. Rich Tibetans employ men to go about with chisel and mallet over the country to engrave it on rocks and stones.* It is called the _Shadakshara Mantra_, or "Six-Syllabled Charm." From what has already been said it is scarcely necessary to repeat that the Mantra is considered to be a most potent sentence. The Lamas, according to Huc, affirm that the doctrine contained in these "marvellous words is immense"; and the whole life of man is insufficient to realise its complete breadth and depth. Huc consulted the Regent of the Dalai-Lama, who told him that living beings are divided into six classes --- angels, demons, men, quadrupeds, birds, and reptiles; and these six classes correspond to the six syllables of the Mantra. It was by repeating these syllables that men avoided transmigration into the lower animals; and rose up in the scale of being till they were absorbed into the universal soul, or the grand and eternal essence of Buddha.*

*) _The Indian Public Opinion and Panjab Times_, January 1876.

*) _Travels in Tartary_, vol. 2. p. 194.

*) _Ibid._ pp. 195, 196.

The wheel as a ritualistic instrument or "machine" appears to be peculiar to Tibet, and Mongolia might perhaps be added. In India the wheel --- as will be shown further on --- was only a symbol; it was in no case an article that could be practically turned with the hands.* Ceylon, which is still Buddhist, has no such instrument; neither has Burmah. Alabaster, in his _Wheel of the Law_, shows by the title of his book that in Siamese Buddhism the symbol must be a familiar one, but it is not a machine in that country. In China and Japan, so far as the wheel as a turning instrument is known, we may assume that the practice was derived from Tibet. This naturally suggests the curious question as to how the symbol became a machine among the Turanian races of the Himalayas. To this I can give no answer. Its use in Lamaism may perhaps be a survival of some of the Bonpa --- the pre-Buddhist religion of Tibet --- practices. It may be assumed that in the machine form we have only a developed condition of the wheel symbolism; for that, including other circular movements, is undoubtedly of old date, even "primitive," I believe, is a word that might be applied to it. I shall have other wheels --- wheels in motion --- it may be added, to touch upon later on; but it is doubtful as to whether they will help us in the Tibetan problem.

*) It will be seen further on that this statement is not exactly correct, but I leave it here, and in other instances, as it was written before I discovered in the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, which will be mentioned further on, that wheels were turned in India before the Buddhist period.

Cunningham writes that "on the gold coins of Hoërki, or Hushka, the Indo-Scythian prince is generally represented holding the prayer-cylinder in his right hand."* Other authorities have described as a "sceptre," and a "club," the article in the king's hand which is supposed to be a "praying-cylinder." If it is the latter, it would prove the existence of the wheel as a "machine" as early as the first or second century CE; and that would be long before Buddhism is said to have reached Tibet. This monarch was an "Indo-Scythian," or a Mongolian, and it would help to prove what has been already stated that it belonged to an old religious system. This would be a valuable point if it could be satisfactorily established, but the evidence of the coins is so very doubtful that it cannot be accepted.

Cunningham makes a statement about the earliest mention of the praying-cylinder, which would be about 400 CE. This he attributes to Fah-Hian,* and does so on the authority of a translation by Rémusat; but since that we have the translation of that pilgrim's travels by Professor Beal, who rejects the earlier rendering, and says there is no reference to "Wheels" in the original.* This is fully confirmed by Professor Legge, who has also translated the book.*

*) _Ladak_, p. 375.

*) _Ladak_, p. 375.

*) _Travels of Fah-Hian and Sung-Yun_. By Samuel Beal (ed. 1869), p. 17, note.

*) _Fâ-Hien's Record of Buddhist Kingdoms_. Translated by Professor Legge, p. 23.

If the Wheel, as a machine, did not pass into Tibet from India, it may be assumed that the Mantra did. Of the six syllables that compose it, five of them at least are Sanscrit, or are derived from that language. It belongs to the Mahayana development, which had taken place before Buddhism had reached Tibet. According to Dr. Waddell, in a paper lately read to the Royal Asiatic Society, the Mantra is more especially connected with the worship of Avalokitesvara, of whom the Dalai-Lama is supposed to be an incarnation.*

*) _Journ. Roy. As. Soc._, January 1894.

The origin and growth of the Mahayana, or system of "The Great Vehicle," in Buddhism, have not as yet been fully brought to light. Probably it was only the absorption by Buddhism of the ideas of older systems, a process which has taken place with other religions.

The Mantra of six syllables which is considered by the Lamas to have such a profound meaning may be taken as an illustration of this. In the Buddhist sculptures of India, figures of Buddha do not appear till about the end of the fourth century; after that date they are common. In these Buddha is represented sitting on the _Padmásana_, or Lotus-Throne. The petals of the lotus are carved all round the edge of the seat on which the figure sits. It is rare to find a statue of Buddha, either sitting or standing, without the lotus being indicated. In some of the smaller rude figures in marble, the petals are often indicated by only a few ogee lines. In large and highly-finished figures, again, the petals are made so ornamental, that their real character might be difficult to realise.* This conventional form of Buddha sitting or standing on this symbolical flower is exactly according to the "Jewel in the Lotus" of the Mantra.

*) It may be mentioned that the figures of Brahmanical deities are also often represented as sitting or standing on a _Padmásana_, or Lotus-Throne.

Ideas of an abstract kind may be supposed to exist before they find expression in art. In the earlier Buddhist books Buddha appears as little more than a teacher. When he went to the Isipatana deer-park, at Benares, and began to "turn the Wheel of the Law," no such wheel as the Tibetan Lamas turn is supposed to have existed. The expression only meant that Buddha began to teach his doctrine, and "found the Kingdom of Righteousness." Buddhism had then no cosmogony, nor hierarchy of saints or divine beings. Those were added afterwards, and with them came the symbolism of the lotus. At what time the lotus first became a symbol it would be difficult to say; it was probably early, but the symbolism it represents is well enough understood, and can be traced back a long way. In many of the ancient cosmogonies creation is said to have had water as its origin. In the Semitic system it is distinctly affirmed. With the Chaldeans Professor Sayce states that "in the cosmology of Eridu... the origin of the universe was the watery abyss."* In the Brahmanic cosmogony it is as old as the Vedas. In the _Rigveda_ the following occurs in the account of creation: "There was then neither non-entity, nor entity; there was no atmosphere, nor the sky which is above. What enveloped [all]? where, in the receptacle of what [was it hid]? Was it water, the deep abyss? Death was not then, nor immortality; there was no distinction of day or night: That, being One, breathed calmly, in self-dependence; there was nothing different from It [that One] or above It. Darkness existed; originally enveloped in darkness, this universe was undistinguishable water."* In the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_ it is written: "This [universe] was in the beginning waters, only water."* Indian art represents Vishnu floating on the abyss of waters on the great serpent _Sesha_, which is also called _Ananta_, or "Eternity." From the umbilicus of Vishnu issues the stalk of a lotus, and on the flower sits Brahma in the act of creating all things.

*) _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 143.

*) _Rigveda_, 10. 129, 1.; Muir's _Sanscrit Texts_, vol. 4. p. 4.

*) _Satapatha-Brahmâna_, 11. 1., 6, 1.; _ibid._ p. 17.

I do not know how the Lamas interpret the "Gem in the Lotus"; it is not likely that they have adopted the comparative method, which is considered in the present day to be the safest in judging of such matters. That mode of investigation leads to the conclusion that the Mantra is a symbolical form of representing the Creative Force in the act of producing all things. The flower floats on the water, and in the Vishnu-on-Sesha pictures Brahma is understood to be creating. In Genesis the Spirit of God is described as moving on the face of the waters at the beginning of all things. The ark floating on the waters of the Deluge is the same symbolism --- the world had been destroyed, and a new creation had to take place. A Psalm says: "The Lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever."* The Fish-god of the Chaldeans was probably another type of the same symbolism. Traces of it are also found in the Egyptian system.* In _Poseidôn_ we have possibly a similar symbolical idea. The visible earth was his part of his father's inheritance, but he is always represented enthroned upon the waters.* El-Masudi writes: "The first thing created, according to a tradition based on the authority of Ibn el-'Abbás and others, was water; upon it was the throne of God."* These examples will be sufficient to show how widespread this particular form of symbolism must have been at some early period.

*) Psalm 29. 10.

*) "There can be no controversy about the meaning of Rā. Rā is not only the name of the sun-god, it is the usual word for sun. In other mythologies the sun-god is borne on a chariot or on horseback; in Egypt, his course across the sky is made in a boat. The sky [_Nu_] is accordingly conceived as an expanse of water, of which the Nile is the earthly representative" (_Hibbert Lecture_, by P. Le Page Renouf, p. 109). Among the hieroglyphic representations on Belzoni's sarcophagus in the Soane Museum, is that of the sun in the solar bark moving through the celestial waters. Wilkinson describes a picture of the dead in Amenti, and says: "Horus... introduces him to the presence of Osiris, who... sits on his throne in the midst of the waters" (_Ancient Egyptians_, vol. 2. p. 447).

*) Robert Brown jun., in his small work entitled _Poseidôn_, identifies, or at least shows some connection between, that deity and the fish-god Dagon, as well as Oannes, pp. 101-110.

*) _Meadows of Gold and Mines of Gems_, translated by Sprenger, vol. 1. p. 43. The Qur'an makes the same statement, "It is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and his throne was upon the water" (chap. 11., Palmer's translation).

There is another signification which I believe is embedded in this mystical Mantra. On realising the meaning of each word in it, and knowing that the lotus had a sexual symbolism, it dawned upon me, very early in my study of this subject, that a sense could be attributed to the Mantra, as well as to the sculptured figures of Buddha on the lotus, that has its counterpart in Brahmanism. The Brahmanical system, it may be explained, by one process, reduces all the powers of nature to two --- these are male and female. The Padma, or Lotus, it is well known, represents the female _Sakti_, or power.* The jewel, or gem, when joined to it, would represent the male power; and the combination becomes identical with the symbols under which Maha Deo, or Siva, is worshipped. This agrees perfectly with the previous conclusion, as it presents to us the symbolisation of the Creative Power which floats on the water.

I find that this conclusion has been fully confirmed by no less an authority than Sir Monier Williams. In his Lectures on Buddhism, delivered at Edinburgh in 1888, regarding the Praying-Wheel, and the sacred Mantra it contains, he says: "Doubtless the prayer really owes its origin to the close connection which sprang up between northern Buddhism and Saivism. The worshippers of Siva have always used similar mystical sentences and syllables called Dhâranîs, to which a kind of miraculous efficacy is attributed. In all probability an occult meaning underlies the "Jewel-lotus" formula, and my own belief is that the majority of those who repeat it are ignorantly doing homage to the self-generative power supposed to inhere in the universe --- a power pointed at by the popular Sânkhya theory of the union of Prakriti and Purusha, and by the universal worship of the Linga and Yoni through out India." To this a footnote is added: "I had formed this opinion long before I saw the same view hinted at in one of Koeppen's notes. (See my _Brahminism and Hinduism_, p. 33.) It is certainly remarkable that the name Mani is applied to the male organ, and the female is compared to a Lotus-blossom, in the Kâma-Sâstras. I fully believe the formula to have a phallic meaning, because Tibetan Buddhism is undoubtedly connected with Saivism."

*) "The lotus-leaf is the womb" (_Satapatha-Brahmâna_, 6. 4, 1., 7, Sacred Books of the East, vol. 41. p. 215).

Some notion may be now formed why this celebrated six-syllabled sentence is so mystical, and is, at the same time, believed to be so potent.

# Chapter 3. --- The Wheel in Indian Buddhism.

It has been already stated that in Indian Buddhism the wheel was not what might be called a "machine," that is an instrument to which motion could be given by the hand or otherwise, as in Tibet. Its character in Indian Buddhism is that of a symbol. It is often referred to in Buddhist books; and it is of frequent occurrence in Buddhist sculpture. It is also represented on old coins. At Sânchi the wheel was placed in the highest position over the centre of the gateways, --- the fragment of one still remains on the northern gate to show that this was the case, --- thus giving it the most important place amongst Buddhist symbols. Cunningham found that it occupied a similar position at Bharhut. Among the Sânchi sculptures it is seen in a variety of forms. Sometimes on the top of a pillar (Fig. 8); at others it is supported on a pedestal, and figures, including Kinnaras,* are represented worshipping the wheel, and making offerings to it (Fig. 9). It is frequently combined with the trisūla* symbol. At Sânchi, and also in the sculptures at Amarávati, the wheel is the principal symbol on the feet of Buddha; in the earlier Buddhist sculptures Buddha himself is not represented. At Amarávati an empty chair is shown, with the marks of Buddha's feet on the footstool below, and the wheel indicated upon each of them (Fig. 10). In the Siamese footprints of Buddha, called the "Phrabat," on which there are 108 symbols, the wheel occupies a large and prominent space in the centre.* The "thousand-ray'd Wheel" on the soles of the feet is one of the marks on a child when born, indicating that he will either be a Chakravarti Rajah, or a Perfect Buddha; and, according to the Buddhist records, Buddha had these marks on his feet at his birth (Fig. 11). As soon as he entered this world, he walked seven steps to each of the cardinal points, and a lotus flower grew up at every step. I note this here on account of the probable connection between the steps and the wheel.

[Fig. 8. --- Wheel on Pillar. Sculpture at Sânchi. From Cunningham's _Bhilsa Topes_.]()

*) "_Kinnaras_" are a kind of celestial beings, "Divine Musicians"; they are variously represented. On the Sânchi Stûpa they have human heads and arms, with what may be intended for the tail and legs of a peacock.

*) _Trisūla_: this is a form of the trident, a symbol common to both Buddhism and Brahmanism. See _supra_, what has already been stated  regarding the Tibetan "Dorjé."

*) A large and careful illustration of one of these is given in Alabaster's _Wheel of the Law_, p. 286. The author gives a long explanation of it, which will show how important the foot and its symbols were to the Buddhists. One may be seen in the British Museum.

It is often a difficult task to explain old symbols that have come down to us from the past. In many cases we have the symbol, but no descriptive authority for the particular meaning that was attached to it. We know that symbols have had new meanings given to them, and at times the sense in which they were understood has been almost completely changed; this has to be remembered, because although we may know the symbolical interpretation that belonged to one system, or to some particular date, it may not be the same that is accepted when the symbol has been adopted by another system, or at another period of time. The study of symbolism is on this account surrounded with difficulties.

[Fig. 9. --- Worshipping a Wheel. Sculpture at Sânchi. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

[Fig. 10. --- Throne and Wheel. From Amarávati Sculptures.]()

[Fig. 11. --- Foot of Buddha, with Wheel and other Symbols. From Amarávati.]()

In the case of the wheel symbol we have statements regarding it from both Buddhist and Brahmanical authorities; and still its exact meaning in these systems is not quite clear. In this I am not speaking of the origin of the wheel and of circular movements in religion and customs, nor of their relation to other systems. In India when any great man conquered or achieved at any time supreme power over the greater part of that country, he received the title of a "Chakravarti." Asoka and Chandragupta, for instance, had this title, and our Queen is, in India, undoubtedly a "Mahâ Chakravarti." Dowson's Dictionary defines this word: "A universal emperor, described by the _Vishnu Purāna_ as one who is born with the mark of Vishnu's discus visible in his hand"; but Wilson observes, "The grammatical etymology is, 'He who abides in or rules over an extensive territory called a Chakra." Chakra is a wheel, but it is also a circle, and Wilson's definition would bring the whole sense down to that of a king who ruled over a country with an extended boundary. The _Vishnu Purāna_ makes the wheel, as in the case of Buddha, to be a quoit, and that the impression of it would be on the hand instead of the foot. The discus is a chakra, so that the identity in this case is clear enough. Buddha was considered to be in a spiritual sense a Mahâ Chakravarti; and at his birth, as described above, he walked seven steps towards each of the quarters --- this has been so told as to justify the title, for it implied the occupation of the four quarters, and that meant the whole world, which, perhaps, in their minds may have only included Jambudwipa, or India. When the Rajasuya, or coronation, of Yudhi-shtira, as a Chakravarti Rajah, took place at Indra-prastha --- the modern Delhi --- supposed to be about 4000 years ago, four grand military expeditions were sent out to the four cardinal points; each expedition was commanded by one of the other four Pandu Brothers. These armies having conquered and brought back the allegiance and tribute from the four quarters, then the coronation of the elder Brother took place, when he became a supreme Wheel Monarch. In the coronation ceremony, at one part of it, "the king was then made symbolically to conquer the four quarters of the earth and the sky. Making him advance successively towards the east, north, south, and west," was supposed to have accomplished this.* The sky was afterwards conquered by merely looking upwards.*

*) _Indo-Aryans_, by Râjendralâla Mitra, vol. 2. pp. 40, 41. Senart states that _Balacakra_ means "Le cercle sur lequel s'étend l'armée et par suite son empire" (_Essai sur la Légende du Buddha_, p. 415).

*) _Ibid._ See Additional Notes, _The Treasure of the Wheel_.

The details of Buddha's birth, and the coronation ceremony, the symbolism of both being evidently the same, show that one meaning of the wheel was that of universal dominion. It meant the Great Circle of Power and Rule.

I have seen it stated that the word chakra, in Chakravarti, should be accepted as a wheel of a vehicle, because it signified all the territory over which a supreme king, as a ruler, could drive his chariot. In Buddhist sculptures the Wheel is always represented as the wheel of a vehicle, which so far confirms this. In relation to this, it should also be recollected that in early times many of the Hindu gods had chariots, that is, in ceremonial processions the car with the figure of the deity in it took part, of which the car-ceremony of Jagannatha* is an example which still survives. As I shall have to say something by and by on the solar or celestial aspect of the wheel, it should be mentioned here that Surya, or the sun, in India, had a car and four horses, identical in this detail with the classic Helios.

[Fig. 12. --- Buddha on Lotus Throne. From a Sculpture in the Ajanta Caves.* From a Sketch by the Author.]()

*) Usually written "Juggernath."

A reference has been made showing some connection between the wheel and the discus of Vishnu. This discus was a quoit, and, being round, was a chakra; but it was a weapon of war. The rings worn by the Akalis at the golden temple, Umritser, will convey an idea of this peculiar weapon. They are made of steel, thin and sharp on the outer edge. The mode of using them is to whirl the quoit round the forefinger, and throw it at the foe; the whirling motion causing them to make a deep wound. The chakra of Indra, according to some accounts, was the same instrument.* Alabaster, in his _Wheel of the Law_, points out that there was some connection between these and the wheel of Buddha. In this, I believe, he is right, but it is difficult to see how it has come about. Alabaster quotes from a Siamese Buddhist work, which says: "This Holy Wheel may be likened to the Chakkra of Indra, king of the angels, which exterminates those against whom it is hurled, and leaves no angel remaining in the heavens it is thrown to; for even so does the Holy Wheel of the Lord Buddha extirpate evil from the dispositions of men, and bring them to holy Nirwana."* I should have looked upon this passage as a mere figure of speech, and not an emblematic idea that had reached a condition of established symbolism, were it not for the description of Buddha's throne at Buddha Gaya. Hiuen Tsiang describes it: "In the middle of the enclosure surrounding the _Bodhi_ tree is the diamond throne [_vajrâsana_]. In former days, when the Bhadra-Kalpa was arriving at the period of perfection [_vivartta_], when the great earth arose, this [_throne_] also appeared. It is in the middle of the great _chiliocosm_; it goes down to the limits of the golden Wheel [_the gold circle_], and upwards it is flush with the ground."* This throne at Buddha Gaya is the spot under the Bodhi tree where Buddha attained to supreme wisdom; and a sculptured slab of chlorite has been found there which is supposed to represent it. The stone is circular, five feet nine inches in diameter, highly ornamented; the outer edge with lotus leaves, and within that is a circle of vajras, or thunderbolts. The Chinese pilgrim calls it the "Diamond Throne," but the word vajrasana, or "Thunderbolt Throne" is added. Now the vajra, or thunderbolt, is another weapon of the gods, and may, although different in shape, be identified with the discus. Indra is sometimes described as having the vajra, and sometimes the discus, as his weapon. The vajras, represented on the Diamond Throne, I may note, are identical in this case with the Tibetan Dorjé, and it is, so far as I know, the only instance where that particular form has yet been found in Indian Buddhist sculptures. If others exist, I should say they are not plentiful. From this peculiar instrument being represented, it may be surmised that there had been some connection with Tibet in producing it. I give these details without attempting to explain at present the connection of such warlike weapons with the seat, or throne, of the Buddha, whose teaching was so strongly directed against the taking of life from any sentient creature.

*) In the _Journal of the Roy. As. Soc._ for July 1893, there is an article entitled "Mythological Studies in the Rigveda," by A. A. Macdonnell, M. A. In a hymn to Indra are the words --- "Like the sun he caused his wheel to whirl." The writer, in commenting on the passage, says this "doubtless simply means he 'sped to the combat on his car as swiftly as the sun speeds on his.'" But to this he adds, "Sāyana suggests as an interpretation that Indra 'whirled his discus (with the later meaning of Cakra) as swiftly as the sun turns his chariot-wheel,'" p. 432. Sāyana was a learned Indian Sanscrit scholar of the fourteenth century, and I cannot pretend to judge whether he, or the more modern commentator, interprets the Veda correctly. Sāyana's words, however, will show how the discus was employed as a weapon.

*) _Wheel of the Law_, by Henry Alabaster, p. 78. The Buddhist work from which he quotes is the "Pathomma Somphothiyan, or the First Festival of Omniscience."

The connection between the wheel and the throne, mentioned above, is a curious one; neither is that a mere figure of speech, for we find the two together in the sculptures (see Fig. 10). At the Amarávati Stûpa the wheel is repeatedly represented on a short pillar above and behind the throne; while in the Buddhist caves of Western India, a portion, nearly one half of it, is shown as projecting from what may be called the box-part of the throne, on which the lotus rests (Fig. 12). If we suppose that the lotus part is the real throne, then it would rest very nearly on the circumference, or "limits" of the wheel, as described by the Chinese pilgrim. As figures of Buddha in sculpture did not appear till about the fourth century, so the figure of Buddha with the wheel in the throne must be classed as belonging to a late period. The wheel in the throne naturally recalls the wheels in the Book of Ezekiel, the consideration of which had better be deferred till we come to the Semitic section.

*) Beal's translation, vol. 2. pp. 115, 116.

*) In this illustration the animals on each side of the wheel are lions, but in most instances where the wheel is thus represented on the throne, the animals are of the deer kind, which no doubt has a reference to the deer-park at Benares, where Buddha began to turn the Wheel of the Law. The speed of the deer may also have symbolised the speed of the Solar Wheel. See Additional Notes, _Wheel Thrones_.

The Buddhists had a Triad; this was formed of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. These have been defined as Buddha, the Law or Doctrine, and the Congregation, --- but this last word, Professor Rhys Davids informs me, should be understood as meaning the Order of Monks. When Cunningham wrote his work on the Bhilsa Topes --- where, as already mentioned, the wheel occurs frequently --- he identified the wheel as the symbol of Buddha. He says: "The symbol of Buddha was, I believe, the wheel, which in its revolution was emblematic of the passage of the soul through the circle of the various forms of existence. Hence the wheel, or whole circle, was typical of any one who, after obtaining Nirvâna, or emancipation from this mortal coil, had _completed_ the _circle_ of his existence, and was no longer subject to transmigration. Such a person was **Buddha**, the founder of the Buddhist religion, who was commonly called the Mahá Chakravartti Raja, or Supreme Lord of the Universe; or more literally, the Great King who hath turned the wheel [of transmigration]. In the _Institutes of Manu_,* transmigration is compared to the wheel of a car; and again, in the _Vishnu Purāna_, 'the mark of Vishnu's discus' is said to be 'visible on the hand of one who is born to be a universal emperor' [Chakravartti]."*

That is Cunningham's explanation of the wheel; to the above he adds the following: "The wheel is the central emblem on the summit of each of the Sânchi gateways. This would seem to have been its usual position, and it was, no doubt, significant of the supremacy of Buddha. In the _Mahawanso_, Raja Sirinago of Ceylon is stated to have inserted gems in the centre of each of the four emblems of the 'Sun' on the Mahá Stûpa, or Great Tope. This, perhaps, points to the absorption of the ancient sun-worship into Buddhism, for the wheel was one of the most common and obvious emblems of the sun."* It may be as well to mention that the Great Tope here referred to was in Ceylon, and not at Sânchi in Central India.

Fergusson, in writing about the Bhilsa Tope --- now better known as the Sânchi Stûpa --- and the symbols upon it, expresses himself thus: "The question what these emblems were intended to represent is by no means satisfactorily settled. General Cunningham seems to consider the Trisul as representing Dharma, or the Law, the second object in the Buddhist Triad, --- Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, so often repeated, and in which the third term signifies the congregation. If any of the three represented Dharma, or the Law, it surely, however, ought to be the Wheel. There is no expression so frequent in the lives of Buddha as that representing him as Turning the Wheel of the Law; and the Wheel of the Law is so often mentioned as almost to justify us without going further in assuming that the Wheels so frequently seen in the sculptures really symbolise the Law."*

*) Ch. 12. sl. 124.

*) _The Bhilsa Topes_, p. 352.

*) _Ibid._

*) _Tree and Serpent Worship_, pp. 214, 215.

I question whether these two explanations can be said to be quite right or wrong; but they fail to convey a complete idea of the wheel as a Buddhist symbol. This will be fully realised by the following extracts from Professor Rhys Davids. In his book on _Buddhism_,* he refers to Gautama's explanation of the fundamental truths of his system as they are preserved in a Pāli work, entitled "The _Dhammacakkappavattana-Sutta_, the Sūtra of the Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness." The first word in this title being the Pāli for _Dharmachakra_, or "Wheel of the Law."

*) Published by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, p. 45.

Regarding the whole sentence contained in the title, the professor writes: "This expression is usually translated 'Turning the Wheel of the Law,' which, while retaining the Buddhist figure of speech, fails to represent the idea the figure was meant to convey; the rendering in the text gives up the figure in order to retain the underlying meaning. The '_cakra_' [Pāli _cakka_] is no ordinary wheel; it is the sign of dominion; and a '_Cakravarti_' is 'he who makes the wheels of his chariot roll unopposed over all the world' --- a universal monarch. _Dharma_ (Pāli _Dhamma_) is not law, but that which underlies and includes the law, --- a word often most difficult to translate, and best rendered here by truth or righteousness; whereas the word 'law' suggests ceremonial observances, outward rules, which it was precisely the object of Gautama's teaching to do away with. _Pravartana_ (Pāli _ppavattana_) is 'setting in motion onwards,' the commencement of an action which is to continue. The whole phrase means, therefore, 'To set rolling the royal chariot-wheel of a universal empire of truth and righteousness'; but this would sound more grandiloquent to us than the original words can have done to the ears of the Buddhists, to whom the allusion to the chakra was familiar through its connection with ancient Hindu mythology."

The last sentence in the above should be noted, as it affirms the pre-existence of the wheel as a symbol with the Hindus, and which will be dealt with again further on. Professor Rhys Davids has translated for the Sacred Books of the East* the _Dhamma-kakka-ppavattana-Sutta_,* the Suttra referred to above; and I give here a passage from the learned professor's Introduction to it. It contains much that is expressed in the previous quotation, but it has some new points, and these, from the writer being a high authority, are worth recording here. "The name given to it by the early Buddhists --- the setting in motion onwards of the royal chariot-wheel of the supreme dominion of the Dhamma --- means, as I have shown elsewhere,* not 'the turning of the Wheel of the Law,' as it has been usually rendered, but 'the inauguration, or foundation, of the Kingdom of Righteousness.' Is it possible that the praying-wheels of Thibet have led to the misapprehension and mistranslation now so common? But who would explain a passage in the New Testament by a superstition current, say, in Spain in the twelfth century? And so when Mr. Da Cuñha thinks that the Dhamma is symbolised by the wheel, because 'Gotama ignored the beginning, and was uncertain as to the end,'* he seems to me to be following a vicious method of interpreting such figures of speech. It cannot be disputed that the term 'Wheel' might have implied such an idea as he puts into it. But if we want to know what it did imply, we must be guided wholly by the previous use of the word at the time when it was first used in a figurative sense; and that previous use allows only of the interpretation given above. Perhaps, however, Mr. Da Cuñha is only copying (not very exactly) Mr. Alabaster, who has said, 'Buddha, as I have tried to show in other parts of this book, did not attempt to teach the beginning of existence, but assumed it as a rolling circle of causes and effects. This was his circle or wheel of the law.'"

*) _Buddhist Suttas_, Sacred Books of the East, vol. 11.

*) The professor, it will be noticed, varies his spelling. In this last book "Chakra" is rendered Kakka as the Pāli form of the word.

*) He here refers to the previous passage given above from his _Buddhism_.

*) _Memoir on the Tooth Relic_, etc., p. 15.

This exposition would seem to show that the Wheel was not merely a symbol of one portion of the faith of Buddha, such as that implied under the words "Buddha," " Dharma," or "Sangha"; but it appears to have represented the whole system, including its very existence and progress. If this is a true notion of its meaning, we must conclude that among the symbols of Buddha it was the one of the very highest importance. The words of the Sutta go far to confirm this. Buddha, after attaining Buddhahood or Supreme Enlightenment at Buddha Gaya, had gone to Benares, and begun the teaching of his system --- this is the event which is usually described as the beginning of the turning of the Wheel of the Law. The Sutta says: 

"And when the royal chariot-wheel of the truth had thus been set rolling onwards by the Blessed One, the gods of the earth gave forth a shout, saying:

"'In Benâres, at the hermitage of the Migadâya, the supreme wheel of the empire of Truth has been set rolling by the Blessed One --- that wheel which not by any Samana or Brâhman, not by any god, not by any Brahma or Mâra, not by any one in the universe, can ever be turned back!'"

"And when they heard the shout of the gods of the earth, the attendant gods of the four great kings [the guardian angels of the four quarters of the globe] gave forth a shout, saying:"

"'In Benâres, at the hermitage of the Migadâya, the supreme wheel of the empire of Truth has been set rolling by the Blessed One --- that wheel which not by any Samana or Brâhman, not by any god, not by any Brahma or Mâra, not by any one in the universe, can ever be turned back!'"*

*) _Dhammakakka-ppavattana-Sutta_, 25, 26; Sacred Books of the East, vol. 11. pp. 153, 154. See Additional Notes, _The Treasure of the Wheel_.

Whatever may have been the origin or significance of the wheel at first as a symbol, the above conveys to us the position that was given to it in Buddhism. Here the natural question arises as to whether the new faith had retained in the symbol the ideas only which had previously belonged to it; or if additions had been made and its symbolism extended? Professor Rhys Davids, as well as others, admits that the Wheel as a symbol is older than Buddhism. It was taken over along with many other things from the pre-existing system or systems. We know that symbols have almost always in the process of transference from one faith to another undergone changes. In such cases new ideas or rites have been attached to them; the opposite process has also taken place, and ideas as well as rites have been dropped out and forgotten. We may almost assume that when Buddhism began mutation had taken place in both of these directions.

With the knowledge that such changes are possible, the question naturally presents itself as to what the wheel had been previous to the appearance of Buddhism. Some answer can be given to this, but still much remains hidden. The wheel is spoken of as an object actually existing. (See the account in Additional Notes of the "Wondrous Wheel" that appeared to the "Great King of Glory." It there appears as a visible object that was followed.) Even the phrase "turning the Wheel of the Law," --- or making the wheel "to roll onwards," as Professor Rhys Davids translates, --- are words that could scarcely have come into existence if there had not been at some period a tangible object of some kind to move. The difficulty is to account for the words without some supposition of this character. If we assume that wheels in some form or another existed, and were used for ritualistic and ceremonial purposes by the pre-Vedic people of some parts of India, the whole would be explained. Buddhism was a reforming movement, and it may --- if the Brahmans did not do it before --- have dropped out the use of the wheel, while it retained its symbolism, which we see had become little more than a metaphorical expression in the Buddhist period. As yet we have found no clue to the first origin of the Tibetan praying-wheel, but if this guess should turn out to be correct, it would be merely a survival of a ritual that existed over some considerable portion of India at an early date. This would be in keeping with much that we know of the Himalayas, where there are many primitive customs remaining, among which may be mentioned that of polyandrous marriage; and we know that it was at one time the custom in India, where it now no longer exists, except among some of the primitive races, such as the Todas and Nairs of the Madras Presidency.

The only other suggestion I can make to explain this problem, would be that it originated in some way from a car-ceremony, in which the wheels of the car became a personification of the power and attributes of the god or monarch to which the vehicle belonged. The cars of the gods occupied a much more prominent place in religious ceremonies at one time than they do now. The _Ratha-Yatra_, or Car-Ceremony at Puri,* is an illustration of this. Its origin and meaning, judging by Dr. Râjendralâla Mitra's large work on the subject, is far from being clearly understood at the present time. All that can be made out is that the moving of the cars with the gods in them is a very sacred ceremony, and a special sanctity belongs to the wheels, for to die under them is to ensure bliss in the next world. The learned doctor gives us the names of the three cars; and, curiously enough, that of Jagannatha is called _Chakradhvaja_, the first part of that word meaning wheel; and the second, Professor Rhys Davids informs me, means "flag" or "standard."* Tod, in his _Rajast'han_, describes how some of the old Rajahs of that part of India have a yearly ceremony of perambulating their capitals in a _Surya-ratha_, or "Chariot of the Sun."* By coupling this with the coronation ceremony of Yudhi-shtira, already referred to, in which the whole earth is conquered by moving to the four quarters, it is not difficult to understand how a car-ceremony might be supposed to have this meaning in it, and how it could be imagined to supply the symbolism which constituted a Chakravarti, or Great Wheel King.

*) Commonly called "Juggernaut."

*) The celebrated car-ceremony at Puri takes place about midsummer; and it will be shown, later on, that this was the date to which the Wheel celebrations of North-Western Europe principally belonged.

*) _Rajast'han_, vol. 2. p. 347.

In a late issue of the _Epigraphia Indica_, Dr. Bühler supplies a reference that may possibly contain the explanation that is here attempted. In the translation of the _Grant of Harshavardhana_, which dates about 632 CE, there occurs the phrase "[_the deity_] with the single-wheeled chariot." To this Dr. Bühler adds a footnote, in which he says: "Though I am unable to prove my supposition by the quotation of parallel passages, or of _Koshas_, I think that the sun is meant, the single wheel of whose chariot may here, as in the _Rig-veda_, represent the year."* It will go far to confirm this when it is shown, as will be done further on, that the wheel had a solar origin.

*) M. Gaidoz connects the origin of the wheel symbol with that of a car, but he thinks that the idea of the sun as a millstone is the oldest. He says: "La roue, image du soliel, ne se rencontre pas chez les [autochtones] et cela se comprend aisément. Cette idée ne pouvait se présenter à l'esprit que chez des peuples ayant déjà des chars, et par conséquent des roues. La conception du soleil comme une meule est done plus ancienne, car le meule a été inventée avant le char" (_Le Dieu Gaulois du Soleil_, p. 8). The same author also states: "Dans tous ces exemples, il est question d'une _roue de Chariot_, qui est la roue par excellence. Cet usage nous fera mieux comprendre l'usage des rouelles dans l'antiquité, dont nous parlerons plus tard" (_Ibid._ p. 36). The italics are the author's; and it should be noted that in this he is speaking of European examples.

These, however, are only speculations, mere attempts to account for what we do not as yet understand. Perhaps as we get more familiar with the Sacred Books of the East more light may be thrown on the subject, and this point may be cleared up.

To this I may add that in the Buddhist sculptures a palpable wheel is represented, and it is the wheel of a vehicle (see Figs. 8, 9, 10, 11). Generally the wheel has eight spokes, at times sixteen. These numbers I take to be founded on the four cardinal points, to which the Hindus add the intermediate points, thus making eight; to each of these a guardian deity is allotted. Sixteen or thirty-two spokes would thus be only a multiple of the four or eight. In the case of the "Wondrous Wheel," it is said to have had a "thousand spokes complete"; this no doubt meant the wheel as the sun, with its multitude of rays, here described as "spokes." This supposition of the "four quarters" I base on the ceremony of the coronation, and at the same time on the legend of Buddha, at his birth, making seven steps in each of these directions. The "four quarters" implied the whole world, and thus meant the circle or _chakra_ of universal power. Of course in this it must be understood that the "Whole World" only meant India, but to rule the whole of that region was what was meant by the title of a _Chakravarti Rajah_. This receives an express affirmation in _The Laws of Manu_, which declare that "a king is an incarnation of the eight guardian dieties of the world."*

*) _The Laws of Manu_, v. 96 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 25. p. 185). See Additional Notes, _The Deities of the Quarters_.

In Buddhist ritual the circular movement held a very prominent place. In order to understand this it will be necessary to give a slight description of one class of Buddhist structures. These are known as "Topes" or "Stûpas," --- the last word being that now generally used. In Ceylon the same monuments are known under the term "Dagoba," while in the rock-cut temples of Western India they are called "Chaityas." The Burmese monuments of this character are usually styled "Pagodas"; and in Tibet they are called "Chhod-Ten," and "Dung-Ten."* Wherever Buddhism flourished these structures were erected in great numbers. In reality they were temples, because they were places of religious devotion. Archæologists are quite agreed as to the origin of these buildings. In primitive times the grave of an important person was heaped up till it became a mound or a cairn. In process of time the heap or cairn was more carefully constructed, and at last it became a work of an architectural character. In India, when cremation became the custom, the stûpa may be said to have ceased being a tomb, and it became a "relic-holder," for it only required a small cell in which were deposited the ashes of the dead. When Buddha died and the body was burned, the ashes were divided into eight portions, these were carried off by his followers, and stûpas were erected to receive them. Stûpas were also erected for the ashes of the principal disciples, and men that acquired repute among the Buddhists for holiness or learning were honoured in this way. The stûpa, although of tomb origin, and practically a funereal erection, became the accepted type for a monument; and many were erected on spots to mark where Buddha had done particular actions. Relics of Buddha, such as hairs, nail-cuttings, teeth, and articles that belonged to him when living, --- or at least were believed to have done so, --- had stûpas erected for their preservation and worship.

*) These names are according to Cunningham; Waddell gives "Chorten" as the form of the first. _The Buddhism of Tibet_, p. 262.

With the exception of the small cell, or at times cells, for the ashes or relics, these shrines were solid masses of bricks or stone. They were generally circular in plan. In the case of one that is well known from Cunningham's explorations and description of it, the Sânchi Stûpa, also known as the "Bhilsa Tope," it was a "solid dome of stone, 106 feet in diameter, and 42 feet in height."* A fairly good idea of these erections will be formed by supposing the dome of St. Paul's with about the half of the drum beneath it to have been a solid mass, and standing on the ground. The apex was surmounted by a number of umbrellas. There are very few of these monuments of the Buddhist period now remaining in India, but in the beginning of the seventh century, when the Chinese pilgrim, Hiuen Tsiang, passed through the country, he described the vast numbers of them that he saw everywhere, --- in one place in the Panjab he speaks of them as being in "hundreds and thousands."* It is important to remember this about the quantity of them in order to realise the amount of circumambulation it implies.

[Fig. 13. --- Plan of the Sânchi Stûpa. **A**, Dome, or body of Stûpa. **B B B B**, Procession Path round the Stûpa. **N E S W**, Gateways or entrances to Procession Path at each of the cardinal points.]()

*) _The Bhilsa Topes_, p. 184.

*) _Hiuen Tsiang_, Beal's translation, vol. 1. p. 175.

The plan of the Sânchi Stûpa (Fig. 13), here given, will show the arrangement for the circular movement. A procession-path, about nine feet wide, was formed round the stûpa by means of a stone railing; it had _torans_, or ornamental gateways, to enter by at each of the cardinal points. The massive character of this stone railing, and the elaborate sculptures on the gateways, are in themselves evidence that the processional path was the important and essential part of these temples. I believe that the monks or priests ascended by the steps at the south gate to the ledge on the top of the drum, where the dome begins, and sat there reading and chanting the service, probably using musical instruments; while the worshippers went round the stûpa in the processional path below, uttering mantras and prayers as they passed along. This pradakshina, or circumambulation of the stûpa, and repeating of mantras while doing so, constituted the principal part of the worship. The devotion to stûpas with their relics became an important feature in the religious service of the Buddhists, and it consisted principally of a circular movement which had its origin in following the course of the sun.

The Buddhists had another kind of temple, the construction and arrangement of which we are familiar with from the rock-cut examples of them that still exist. These may be termed either _Chaitya_ Halls, or _Chaitya_ Temples, from the _chaitya_, or small stûpa, which formed the altar at one end (see Fig. 14). Although no connection is possible between them, these chaitya temples bear a strong resemblance, which has been often noticed, in plan to a Christian church. The chaitya occupies the end of the nave as the altar; on each side are columns separating the aisles from the nave. The aisles pass round behind the chaitya, exactly as the aisles form a passage behind the high altar in most cathedrals, but the ritual of the two temples is far from being the same. From what I saw in the Tibetan Lamaseries, I take it that the monks sat in the nave in front of the chaitya, where they performed their elaborate service. The worshippers would enter the aisle on the left and walk along it, then round by the back of the chaitya, coming out again by the other aisle. In doing this they circumambulated the chaitya, and the performance was essentially the same as that already described which was done at the worship of the stûpa.

[Fig. 14. --- Buddhist Chaitya Temple. **A**, the Chaitya, or Stûpa. **B**, the Nave. **C C**, the aisles which form the Procession Path round the temple and chaitya.]()

It need scarcely be pointed out that these acts again were similar to what is done at the present day by the Tibetans, at the manies, or dikes of stone, which are always passed on the right hand, so that in going and returning past them a circumambulation is thus accomplished.

The worship of the stûpa or chaitya was in reality the Worship of Relics, and before cremation became the rule, when the body was buried in the mound or cairn --- if the custom was as old as that, which is most probable --- it was originally one of the forms of tomb-worship. This circumambulating rite had another connection with death at the cremation ceremony, of which we have a good illustrative example in the burning of Buddha's body as it is described in _The Book of the Great Decease_. It is there related that Mahâ Kassapa, one of the most noted of the early disciples, came, accompanied by five hundred brethren, "to the place where the funereal pile of the Blessed One was. And when he had come up to it, he arranged his robe on one shoulder; and bowing down with clasped hands, _he thrice walked reverently round the pile_; and then, uncovering the feet, he bowed down in reverence at the feet of the Blessed One. And those five hundred brethren arranged their robes on one shoulder; and bowing down with clasped hands, _they thrice walked reverently round the pile_, and then bowed down in reverence at the feet of the Blessed One. And when the homage of the venerable Mahâ Kassapa and of those five hundred brethren was ended, the funeral pile of the Blessed One caught fire of itself.*

*) _The Mahâ-Parinibbâna-Sutta_, or _Book of the Great Decease_, translated by Professor Rhys Davids, 6. 45-47 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 11. p. 129). The translator adds a note to what is above quoted about the reverencing of the feet, to which I would add that in all the representations of Buddha's feet the wheel is the largest and most prominent symbol. We know from Hiuen Tsiang that at the places where Buddha was said to have walked the marks of his steps were shown as sacred spots. At his birth Buddha walked so many steps to each of the cardinal points. In these facts it is just possible that we may have some evidence that the feet and the walking were considered to be connected with Buddha's character as a Chakravarti. But again we have to discount the above as a probable solution by the knowledge that Buddha described the practice of his teaching as that of following a "path," and as his feet had followed that path to complete the full blessedness of Nirvâna, they may have been thus looked on as sacred. There are feet-marks, some of them sacred, in many parts of the world. Toes of sacred persons, and of statues, are said to be kissed at Rome. Suppliants throw themselves at the feet of those they wish to appease, and this may be the most probable explanation of the first origin of devotion to feet. But then it should always be remembered that in symbolical rites, the first origin may be widely separated from the later ideas that have been developed into the ceremony.

The italics in the above, it need scarcely be said, are not in the original. The custom of going three times round the funeral pile is, I believe, still the rule in India. It is done by the person who sets fire to it, and, if I mistake not, he carries the light in his hand as he goes round. The account of the cremation of Buddha shows that the custom has come down from an early period.

_The Book of the Great Decease_ supplies us with an interesting fragment of another custom which was common in India, that is the making of a pradakshina, or circumambulation, of a holy person as a mark of respect. When Buddha was at Vesâli, Ambapâli invited him and his followers to her house to have their daily meal; on the invitation being accepted, Ambapâli "rose from her seat and bowed down before him, and _keeping him on her right hand as she past him_, she departed thence."* The young Likkhavis are described as acting in the same manner when they left Buddha after an interview.* A translation of _The Ratthapāla Sutta_, by Walter Lupton, I. C. S., given in the _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_ for October 1894, describes the visit of the Brahmans and people of Thullakotthita to Buddha. At the end of the interview they made a respectful farewell, and departed "keeping him ever on the right."* Other instances are mentioned of this rule in the same _Sutta_. This movement is not necessarily in itself a complete circle, but, like that of the Tibetans at the manies, if the same rule is observed on next passing the holy person, a full circumambulation will be realised.

*) _Ibid._ 2. 17, p. 30.

*) _The Mahâ-Parinibhâna-Sutta_, 2. 22, p. 33. See also 4. 16, p. 71; and 4. 46, p. 80.

*) 1894, p. 791.

# Chapter 4. --- The Wheel in the Brahmanic System.

It will now be understood that the wheel we are dealing with is not to be limited to the ordinary notion of a "Praying Machine," which has been generally accepted as its character. On the contrary, it will be found to be an object around which a very large and diversified accumulation of symbolism has gathered, and that too even at a far back period. We are in the present day discovering symbols which have existed in most parts of the old world, and to which the word "universal" has been applied; and it will be shown in these pages that the wheel is one of these. There are also religious rites and customs that seem to be common to the greater part of the human race; and one of the profound questions among archæologists is whether these symbols, rites, and customs had one origin in some original home, from which men radiated over the earth, carrying the first idea of these things with them, or if they sprang up in the different localities, and their similarity resulted from the mind of man being much the same in its various stages of progress. This uniformity, combined with the uniformity in the operations of nature, might have led to the separate evolution of conceptions which bear a strong resemblance to each other. In the present state of our knowledge I think it wise to suspend judgment on the merits of these two theories. Perhaps the migratory theory and the original evolution theory may both have to be adopted. If the primitive home of the Aryans could be satisfactorily determined, a step of progress might be made; but at present it will be best to leave this matter to the future, and continue to collect data which may help to work out a correct solution of the problem under safe conditions of progress. By showing the universality of the wheel as a symbol, these pages may perhaps be found to be a slight contribution towards the desired result.

It will now be shown that the wheel was a recognised symbol in Brahmanism, and that religious rituals and customs were based upon it. The evidence for this is ample enough. As a general statement to begin with, the high authority of Dr. Bühler may be taken. At the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists, held in London in 1892, he read a short paper on some Jaina sculpture lately found by Dr. Führer in the Kankâli Tila at Mathura. On one of these there is a "Dharmachakra," which he says agrees, "except in two very small details, in shape with the 'Wheel of the Law' common on the Buddhist monuments. Both the Jainas and the Bauddhas borrowed the Dharmachakra from the Brahmans, who mention it as the symbol of the 'undisputed reign of the sacred law.'"* An inscription on the sculpture gives the date as 156-57 CE (see Fig. 15).

*) _Transactions of the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists_, vol. 1. p. 221. See Additional Notes for further details by Dr. Bühler.

The sculpture being Jaina, confirms Dr. Bühler's statement that the wheel had been adopted as a symbol by the followers of that faith; but the more important point declared by this high authority is that both the Jainas and the Buddhists borrowed the wheel from the Brahmans.

[Fig. 15. --- Wheel on Jaina Sculpture, Mathura. From the _Epigraphia Indica_, vol. 2. p. 321.]()

Not many days have passed since the time when I was writing to show that there were some grounds for believing that a wheel, as an object that could be turned, had existed in India, and that it was probably pre-Buddhist. Since then I have been reading the third part --- only lately published --- of the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, a work which is being so very carefully translated by Professor Eggeling; and here I find a wheel that could be turned was used in a ritualistic ceremony. One of the suggestions I made was that the wheel probably had its origin in some way from a ceremony with cars. The wheel as represented in the sculptures is that of a vehicle, and that naturally led to the supposition. As yet I do not feel entitled to affirm that this is quite correct, but the ceremony with the wheel, as it is given in the _Brâhmana_, was intimately connected with a chariot-race which had a religious significance. The first sentence of the passage to be quoted states that this "terrestrial world" is to be won by the race; and the performance on the wheel, when that is added, gains the "air-world" and the "world of the gods." The whole thus becomes equal to Vishnu's three strides by means of which he gained the "three worlds," that is the earth, the atmosphere, and the sky. It may also be considered as acquiring the universal power of a Chakravarti, that is a great wheel king who rules all things.

The _Brâhmana_ gives minute details about the chariot, and the yoking of the horses, which need not be quoted. Then comes the following: "Now when they run a race, he hereby wins this same [terrestrial] world. And when the Brahman sings a Sâman* on the cart-wheel set up on [a post] reaching to his navel, he thereby wins the air-world. And when he erects the sacrificial post, he thereby wins the world of the gods. Hence that threefold performance. The Brahman mounts a cart-wheel, set up on [a post] as high as his navel, with [_Vag. S._ 9. 10], 'At the impulse [sava] of the god Savitri, of true impulsion, may I ascend unto the highest heaven of Brihaspati!' thus, if a Brâhmana sacrifices, for Brihaspati is the Brahman [priesthood, or sanctity], and the Brâhmana is the Brahman."* This is followed further on by saying --- "Thrice he sings the sâman. Having thrice sung it, he descends with, 'At the impulse of the divine Savitri, of true impulsion, I have ascended unto the highest heaven of Brihaspati!'"

*) A hymn from the _Sâma Veda_.

Professor Eggeling adds a couple of footnotes containing some valuable information from other authorities upon this curious ceremony. One of them says: "According to the Taittirîya ritualists, as quoted by Sâyana (_Taitt. S._ 1. 7. 8), the wheel after being mounted by the Brahman is to be turned round thrice in a sunwise motion;--- the (pointed) end of the post being apparently inserted in the navel of the wheel, lying horizontally upon it. The turning wheel is there compared with the Vajra, or disk-shaped thunderbolt. While the wheel is turning round its axle, the Brahman sings the Sâman. Cf. also _Lâty. Sr._ v. 12. 9 _seq._, according to which authority, however, the Brahman would seem only to put his arms on the wheel, and turn it round while singing." The next footnote begins with a quotation in Sanscrit from the sâman, of which a translation is given: "'The fiery steeds have gathered fiery mettle, the impulse of the god Savitri; win ye the heavens, O coursers!' (_Lâty. Sr._ v. 12. 14). This singing of the sâman takes place while the race lasts, the Brahman remaining all the time on the cart-wheel put up on a short post on [or near] the _utkara_, or heap of rubbish."

*) _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, v. 1. 5. 1-2 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 41. pp. 22, 23).

One could have wished for more details of this rite, still the quotations are sufficient to show that a wheel was turned, and that by singing the words from the _Sâman Veda_ upon it, the sacrificer is raised to the highest heaven. The references just given indicate variations in the ritual which leave some doubt as to what actually took place; most probably the performance changed in course of time, and it was not the same in every locality. The _Brâhmanas_ date some centuries before the appearance of Buddhism, so we may safely assume, as already stated, that the wheel was not originated by the later system; and that the borrowing was, as Dr. Bühler affirms, by the Jainas and Buddhists from the Brahmans. The wheel as represented in the Buddhist sculptures might be a "cart-wheel," and it is generally represented on the top of a pillar or post; and the old Buddhist lâts, which, as their name implies, were only posts, were often surmounted by wheels. The only marked point of difference between these sculptures and the description in the _Brâhmana_ is that in the one the wheel was horizontal, and in the other it stands on its edge. This can be easily accounted for. To represent a wheel in a horizontal position in sculpture would require a knowledge of art, and more particularly of perspective, which these early artists had no pretension to; so they represented the object in the only manner that their capacity enabled them to do. Taking this into consideration, we now see that in these sculptures we have a tolerably correct picture of the wheel as an instrument that could be turned, which agrees in every detail with the description of it as it existed at the period of the _Brâhmanas_.

The results to be obtained by this Brahmanic wheel are scarcely less in magnitude than those believed in by the Buddhist teachers as possible to be derived through their ritual, or even the benefits said to be produced by twirling the wonder-working barrels of the Lamas. Although similar in this respect, still the "cart-wheel" in the one case and the revolving cylinder in the other present us with very different forms of this symbolical instrument. It can scarcely be doubted that the two have had the same origin, and have sprung from some primitive type, and the divergence between them can only be accounted for by time and geographical space causing the changes that have occurred; and it is to be hoped that future research may yet throw some light on the presently unknown development of the Tibetan wheels.

Professor Eggeling mentions that one of his authorities compares the Brahmanic wheel with the vajra, or thunderbolt. This forms a marked point of agreement with the Buddhist Dharmachakra, and adds another proof, if such were required, that the two are the same.

By referring back in these pages to the Buddhist section, where the Chinese pilgrim describes the "Diamond Throne," which is called the Vajrâsana, or "Thunderbolt Throne," as touching the limits of the "Golden Wheel"; and also to the illustrations of Buddha's throne, one of which shows the Wheel on a short post behind the throne, and the other with the wheel beneath the lotus part of the throne, so that Buddha is actually sitting upon it, and comparing it with this account of the Brahman sitting on the wheel whereby he wins the three worlds, it will be seen that we have conditions described that are very closely allied; and it seems to throw a new light on the wheel as a symbol of a Chakravartin, or Great Wheel Monarch.

The judgment of Dr. Bühler has already been quoted regarding the borrowing by the Buddhists of the wheel from the Brahmans. To this may be added that of M. É. Senart, a name that stands in the front rank of Sanscrit scholars. His work, _Essai sur la Légende du Buddha_, is a careful and profound analysis of the story of Buddha, and more particularly of the symbolism that became absorbed into his system. The ideas associated with the title of a Chakravartin and the wheel are very fully dealt with, and the book can be recommended to those who wish to study the subject more in detail than can be accomplished in these pages. I have already quoted from the _Mahâ-Sudassana-Sutta_* the legend of the "Wondrous Wheel," which was the first of the "seven precious things" that belonged to the great King of Glory, who was Buddha in a former birth. M. Senart shows that the _Saptaratnas_, or seven jewels, or treasures, including the wheel, belonged to Brahmanism, and were known as far back as the Vedic period. This being important as a point in the antiquity of the symbol, I take from him the reference from the _Veda_. It is, --- "Un passage dit d'Agni: 'Établissant dans chaque demeure les sept ratnas.'"* He also quotes from the _Taittirîtya Sanhitâ_, which is of course later than the _Veda_: "O Agni-Vishnu, grand est votre grandeur! Goûtez le beurre sacré sous tous ses noms mystérieux; apportant les sept ratnas dans chaque demeure, que votre langue s'approche du beurre sacré."* M. Senart gives other passages from the _Rig-Veda_, showing that the wheel was known as a symbol when the hymns were composed, and as his knowledge of Sanscrit is a guarantee of accuracy, I quote from his pages: "dirègeant comme le plus habile cocher, parmi le nuage [qui ressemble à un chemin inégal et] raboteux, la roue d'or du soleil."* It may be noticed in this that the wheel is golden and solar. Again, "les sept attellent le char à la roue unique; un coursier unique au septuple nom meut la roue au triple moyen, la roue immortelle, que rien n'arrête, sur laquelle reposent tous les êtres."* From this passage it will be seen that in the Vedic period the wheel had the attribute that nothing could stop it, agreeing in this with the declaration made when Buddha began to "turn the Wheel of the Law" at Benares, "that not by any one in the universe can ever be turned back." This seems to have been a well-understood notion about the wheel, and it survived for many centuries afterwards, as the following will show, where it is only referred to metaphorically. It is from the _Anugîtâ_. The Brâhmana is telling Janaka, who had attained to profound wisdom and holiness, that he was "the one person to turn this wheel, the nave of which is the Brahman, the spoke the understanding, and which _does not turn back_."* The _Svetâsvatara Upanishad_ contains a reference to the wheel, to which it attaches the name of Brahma: "In that vast Brahma-wheel in which all things live and rest."* This is only a metaphorical allusion, of which there are many similar in the Brahmanical books, and a few will be found in the Additional Notes. The _Vedas_ and _Upanishads_ being the oldest documents in India, the quotations given above show that the wheel was a familiar idea at least as far back as 1500 BCE, that being the date generally accepted when the _Veda_ was compiled, the hymns having existed in an unedited condition long before that.

*) See Additional Notes.

*) _Rig-veda_, v. 1. 5; quoted in _Essai_, p. 21. _Ratna_ means a jewel, gem, or precious thing.

*) _Taitt. Sanh._, 1. 8. 22, 1. (_Essai_, p. 22).

*) _Rig-veda_, v. 6. 56. 3 (_Essai_, pp. 24-5).

*) _Ib._ v. 1. 164. 2 (_Essai_, p. 420).

*) _Anugîtâ_ ch. 17. (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 8. p. 306).

*) _Svetâsvatara Upanishad_, 1. 6 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 15. p. 234). See Additional Notes, _The Wheel of Life._

In ritual and custom the Brahmans --- one ought perhaps in this case to say Hindus --- had almost the same forms of circular movements that have been already described as Buddhist, showing that the Buddhists not only adopted the wheel from the former, but that they also adopted the rotatory motions in their ceremonies which had been long practised in that part of the world. Instead of saying "adopted," it would perhaps be more accurate to use the word "continued," for Buddhists and Hindus, or Brahmans, were all one people, and a race does not give up all its old customs when it goes through the process of a change of faith.

Passing sacred things and persons keeping the right hand towards them, which was practised by the Buddhists, is a rule declared by _Manu_. A Brahman, when he becomes a householder, is told: "Let him pass by [a mound of] earth, a cow, an idol, a Brâhmana, clarified butter, honey, a cross-way, and well-known trees, turning his right hand to them."*

*) _The Laws of Manu_, 4. 39 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 25. p. 135). It may be as well to state that the title of this book, _The Laws of Manu_, is only another rendering of what used to be known as _The Institutes of Menu_. It is the later method of rendering its Sanscrit name of _Dharma-Sastra_. From a new transliteration, the translators of the Sacred Books of the East generally write the word Brahman as Brâhmana. As a rule, I write "Brahman," but quote as the words are written, that is, with the exception of some letters which are in italics to indicate particular sounds. The _n_ in Brâhmana, as an instance, is italic in the newer orthography. The proper name Janaka (see _supra_) is given in the new system as _G_anaka, the capital being italic, which simply means that it is pronounced soft, as J.

When a young man has finished his studentship, there is a ceremony of driving a chariot which he has to perform: in this it is directed that "with a new chariot he should drive round a widely-known tree or round a pool that does not dry up, with his right side turned towards it." This rule is particularly insisted upon. Another law-book says: "He shall pass excellent [beings and things], auspicious [objects], temples of the gods, cross-roads, and the like, with his right turned towards them."*

*) _Âsvalâyana-Grihya-Sûtra_, 2. 6. 9 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 210).

*) _Sacred Laws_, Gautama, 9. 66  (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 2. p. 223).

The word _Pradakshina_ has been already used in these pages, and as it is an important term in relation to Brahmanical as well as Buddhist ritual, it will be as well to explain it. _Dakshina_ means "the right," or on the right hand; its modern form in Hindostani is _dahina_. The word also means "south," and will be found on maps of India as the _Deccan_, now written _Dekhan_. A line drawn from Bombay to Calcutta will roughly indicate where the "south" begins; it includes all south of that line, or what may be called the peninsular part of India. The connection between the two meanings of this word originates from its being supposed that a worshipper stands facing the east, the quarter of the gods, and in that position his right hand is towards the south. Standing thus he begins to circumambulate, keeping the right hand towards the object to which his devotion is directed. Such a circumambulation is a "pradakshina." Here is a passage from _The Institutes of Vishnu_ which will illustrate the point. In the _Shrâddas_, which are rites to the _pitris_, or the dead, the person who celebrates gives food to the Brahmans; and "afterwards he must, while turning his face towards the Brâhmanas facing the east, circumambulate them from left to right."*

The following, written by Professor Eggeling, will make this clearer, while at the same time it has a great value in reference to what will be dealt with in these pages when the wheel and circular movements among the Gauls and Celts have to be considered. Professor Eggeling is translating the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_ for The Sacred Books of the East, and as it is wholly a book of ritual, the pradakshina, or circumambulatory ceremony, is of frequent mention in it. He gives a footnote on the subject. The text of the _Brâhmana_ describes the placing of potsherds with offerings on them in a circular form, and the note refers to them, viz. "dividing them in the manner explained at p. 34, note 1, and beginning [south] east, and moving around from left to right [_i. e._ following the course of the sun]. Mr. Ralph Griffith (_Translation of the Rámáyan_, 1. p. 90) has compared this Hindu rite of pradakshina or _dakshinîkarana_ with the Gaelic deasil, as described in the following passage of Sir W. Scott's _The Two Drovers_: "'But it is little I would care for the food that nourishes me, or the fire that warms me, or for God's blessed sun itself, if aught but weel should happen to the grandson of my father. So let me walk the _deasil_ round you, that you may go safe out into the foreign land, and come safe home.' Robin Oig stopped, half embarrassed, half laughing, and signing to those near him that he only complied with the old woman to soothe her humour. In the meantime she traced around him, with wavering steps, the propitiation, which some have thought has been derived from the Druidical mythology. It consists, as is well known, in the person who makes the _deasil_ walking three times round the person who is the object of the ceremony, taking care to move according to the course of the sun.' Cf. note at p. 45. Note also the etymological connection between dakshina and deiseil (Old Ir. _dessel_, from _dess_, Gael. _deas_, south or right side). For the corresponding rite [_dextratio_] at the Roman marriage ceremonies, see Rossbach, _Römische Ehe_, pp. 315, 316; Weber, _Ind. Stud._ v. p. 221."*

*) 73. 26. _Sacred Books of the East_, vol. 7. p. 236. See Additional Notes, _The Pradakshina_. "By the Hindu who worships the sun, the cardinal points are named with reference to the east, as _para_, the 'front,' or the 'east,' to which he turns in his daily morning worship; _apara_, 'behind,' or the 'west'; _vâma_, the 'left' hand, or the 'north'; and _dakshina_, the 'right' hand, or the 'south'" (_The Ancient Geography of India_, Cunningham, p. 94).

The note referred to by Professor Eggeling at p. 45 is also worthy of a place here, and both should be consulted in connection with similar rites peculiar to the Celts. The text of the _Brâhmana_ describes the making of a cake as a sacrificial offering, and among the details connected with its production, fire is carried round it. The footnote refers to this. "The _paryagnikaranam_* consists in performing a pradakshina on an object whilst holding a firebrand, or burning coal; or [according to the _Paddhati_] in moving one's hand, which holds the burning coal, round the oblation, from left to right. According to Kâty. (2. 5. 22), the Adhvaryu does so on the present occasion, whilst muttering the formula, 'Removed are the Rakshas!* removed are the enemies!' (_Taitt. S._ 1. 1. 8. 1). This practice of paryagnikaranam may be compared with the carrying of fire round houses, fields, boats, etc., on the last night of the year, a custom which, according to Mr. A. Mitchell (_The Past in the Present_, p. 145), still prevails in some parts of Scotland, and which he thinks is probably a survival of some form of fire-worship, and intended to secure fertility and general prosperity. The obvious meaning of the ceremony would seem to be the warding off of the dark and mischievous powers of nature."*

*) _Satapatha-Brâhmana_ (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 12. p. 37, note).

*) _Agni_, the second syllable of this long word, it may be explained, is the Sanscrit term for "fire."

*) _Rakshas_, or Rakshasas_, are evil spirits or demons.

*) _Satapatha-Brâhmana_ (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 12. p. 45, note).

It was shown that the making of a pradakshina was a marked feature in Buddhist worship, and how the temples were constructed for that purpose. The modern Hindu temple has no procession-path round it, but in the few very old temples now remaining of which we have plans, such as those at Aiwulli, Pittadkul, and the Kylas of Ellora, the space round the sanctum for the pradakshina may be seen. The oldest of these temples, that of Aiwulli, only dates back to the seventh century CE, and we may be said to know almost nothing of the plan or construction of Brahmanical temples before that period.

If the remains of old temples that can be produced as evidence on this subject are few, the same cannot be said of the references to the pradakshina rite in the sacred books of the Brahmans, where it will be found to have formed part of almost every one of the religious observances of that system. To quote every passage from these books with this ceremony in it would be to give a very long and unnecessary repetition of similar statements. The books are now being translated into our own language, and can be consulted by any one who is interested in the subject. A few quotations have been given above, and others which bear upon particular aspects of the case will follow.

The pilgrimage of the Panch-Kosi* at Benares is in reality a very long pradakshina, for it lengthens out to at least fifty miles. Benares is a city of temples, and "every inch of soil within its boundary is, in the Hindus' imagination, hallowed." The whole may be looked upon as a temple, and sacred to Mahadeo, or Siva. The city is mythically supposed not to stand upon this earth, but is believed to be built on the three points of Sivá's trident. It need scarcely be stated that the circumambulation of such a holy spot gives to the person that performs it a large amount of karma, or merit; and no pilgrim returns from the holy city without taking advantage of this soul-purifying ceremony. It requires six days, and has to be done on foot. The Rev. M. A. Sherring's description contains the principal data, but he omits to notice that this going round the city bounds is a pradakshina, and there is no mention as to whether the pilgrim has his right or left to the centre; but from the details of the route, which he gives, this point is easily arrived at. The pilgrim starts on the journey from the Manikarniká Ghát --- that is close to the Burning Place --- and goes along the river-side to the Asi Sangam and Asi Ghát. These places being up the river, at the north west corner of the city, the person passing to them from the Manikarniká Ghát must have his right hand to the centre. After passing round the city on the inland side, on the sixth day he returns again to the river, at the Barna Sangam, which is at the south-east extremity of the town; and finishes the circumambulation by walking along the Gháts to the Manikarniká, the point he started from, thus completing the circle with his right to the centre. On the last day of this, which, from its length and duration, might be called a _maha pradakshina_, "the pilgrim scatters on the ground grains of barley, which he carries in a bag made for the purpose: this curious custom is in honour of Sivá."* On the assumption that the pradakshina has a solar symbolism, and the circle gone over represents the yearly cycle, the barley may possibly mean the results of the sun's power, the food that is annually produced and scattered over the earth for the good of all living beings.

*) _Panchakoshi Yátrá_, or "Five-Kos Pilgrimage."

*) _The Sacred City of the Hindus_, by the Rev. M. A. Sherring, p. 177.

At Bhuvanes'vara, in Orissa, there is a similar pilgrimage, called _Kshetra parikramana_, or "Going the round of the city," and which Dr. Râjendralâla Mitra thinks was founded in imitation of the Panch-Kosi at Benares. This circuit, he says, "takes several days to accomplish. The _Ekráma Purāna_, however, does not insist upon this large circuit; it assigns the inner circle formed by a radius of one mile round the Great Tower as the proper boundary of the circumambulation; but it recommends the operation to be repeated three times, and gives directions how it is to be performed, and what mantras should be repeated when starting on the journey. The religious merit of the operation is even greater than the performance of ten thousand horse sacrifices. All sins that might be contracted in other sacred places are wiped away in visiting Svarnakúta [Khandagiri], but what are contracted in the last-named place can be destroyed only by making the circumambulation of the sacred city."* This high sin-cleansing virtue will convey some idea of the potency that was ascribed to these circular movements.

*) _The Sacred City of the Hindus_, by the Rev. M. A. Sherring, p. 178.

*) _The Antiquities of Orissa_, by Râjendralâla Mitra, LL. D., C. I. E., etc., vol. 2. p. 60.

[Fig. 16. --- A Hindu circumambulating the sacred Tulsi Plant. From a Sketch by the Author.]()

The instances of Ambapâli and others passing Buddha with their right hand towards him have been already mentioned; this was an old custom, I believe, in India, of paying respect to a holy person. The rule was to move three times round him. It may, perhaps, be yet done in India; but, if so, I never chanced to see it. I have a distinct recollection of a man I saw in a village somewhere in the Bombay Presidency. He was making a pradakashina round a tulsi plant, the _Ocymum sanctum_, a labiate, the flower of which is of a dark blue colour, and on that account sacred to Vishnu. It was growing on a mud pedestal carefully prepared for it, and round this he walked a number of times, with his right hand to the centre. To me it was a novelty, for at the time I had not grasped the full meaning of such movements. He was continuing a practice that I have no doubt now was as old, much older, perhaps, than the time of the Vedas (see Fig. 16).

Go-Vardhana, now known as Goverdhun, a hill near Mathura, is celebrated as the mountain that Krishna induced the cowherds and cowherdesses to worship instead of Indra. Krishna with his followers, as related in the _Prem Ságar_, "circumambulated the mountain to the right, by way of adoration."* Krishna's circular dance with the Gopis will be dealt with further on.

*) _Prem Ságar_, chap. 25. p. 50. Eastwick's translation.

In building a house, the householder has to inspect the ground, and after using a number of tests, he, "with a Samî branch or Udumbara branch, sprinkles it [with water], going thrice round it, so that his right side is turned towards it, reciting the Santâtîya hymn. And [so he does again three times] pouring out water without interruption, with the three verses, 'O waters, ye are wholesome'" (_Rig-veda_, 10. 9. 1 _seq._).*

*) _Ásvalâyana-Grihya-Sûtra_, 2. 2. 12. (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 213).

At the Brahmanical marriage ceremony, the bride-groom leads the bride three times round the fire, with their right sides turned towards it.* According to _Manu_ the seventh step round the fire makes the marriage ceremony complete.* From another authority, quoted by Dr. Bühler in a note to the above, after the seventh step "the marriage cannot be rescinded." As the fire in this case is the altar, this rite has an interest in connection with the marriage ceremony in the Russian-Greek Church, where the altar is circumambulated three times.

There used to be a ceremony in India --- which has been suppressed, and I think it was peculiar to Bengal --- called the _Charakpuja_,* in which a man had hooks put into the flesh of his back, and was suspended by ropes to the end of a bamboo, the bamboo being tied by the middle to the top of a high post, so that it could be moved round. By depressing the one end of the bamboo, the end with the man attached rose up bearing him high above the crowd, in which position he was whirled round. The whirling round, I always understood, was the essential part of the ceremony. Since the discovery, in the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, of a Brahman having been whirled about on a wheel, it has occurred to me that the _Charakpuja_ may be a survival of that, or of some other form of the same kind. I give this as the merest guess.*

*) _Khâdira-Grihya-Sûtra_, 1. 3. 24. 25 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 382). See also _Pâraskara-Grihya-Sûtra_, 1. 5. 1 (_Ibid._ p. 279).

*) _Manu_, 8. 227 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 25. p. 295).

*) Yule in _Hobson-Jobson_ states that _Churruck_ is from the Persian _Churkh_, "the celestial sphere," "a wheel of any kind." Bengal "_Charak_ is apparently a corruption of the Persian word, facilitated by the nearness to the Sanscrit _Chakra_," etc. On the _Charakpuja_ he adds that it takes place on the sun's entrance into Aries. "The chief seat of this barbarous display is, or latterly was, in Bengal, but it was formerly prevalent in many parts of India."

*) Since the above was written I have chanced upon the following in _Hiuen Tsiang_, Beal's translation, vol. 1. p. 234: "The heretics who practise asceticism have raised a high column in the middle of the river." This was at Prayâga, the present Allahabad, a very holy spot with the Hindus. "When the sun is about to go down they immediately climb up the pillar; then clinging on to the pillar with one hand and one foot, they wonderfully hold themselves out with one foot and one arm; and so they keep themselves stretched out in the air with their eyes fixed on the sun, and their heads turning with it to the right as it sets." By "heretics," Hindus are here meant. The performance of the Ascetic turning "to the right," which means from the left and sunwise, and on a bamboo post, which I think ought, in India, to be the proper reading in this instance for "high pillar," bears just a faint resemblance to the _Charakpuja_.

One noted instance of a rotatory movement is that of the _Rasa-Mandala_, also called the _Mandala-Nritya_, or the mystical dance of Krishna with the Gopis. This is a favourite subject for pictures, and it is often represented in sculpture or painting in temples of Krishna, round the base of the dome, to indicate that the dance refers to the celestial dome above. The Gopis were the cowherdesses that Krishna flirted so much with, but in the _Prem Ságar_ they are spiritualised into the verses of the Veda. In the sculptures or pictures they are young women. Each of them wished to have the god as her partner in the dance, and he by his divine mystical power caused each Gopi to believe that she was dancing with him, and this is figured by a circle composed with a repetition of Krishna between each of the Gopis all round. Each figure of the god plays on a flute, and thus supplies the music of the circular dance, and from this Krishna has been called the "Hindu Apollo." The explanation of this is that it represents the great celestial movement of the spheres, of which the sun is the principal object. It would seem, if the _Prem Ságar_ is to be relied upon, that this dance took place at night; it says: "The moon, with the circle of stars, being fascinated, was pouring down nectar with its rays. Meanwhile, the night advanced and six months passed away, and no one was aware of it, and from that time the name of that night has been --- the night of Brahmá."* I do not feel sure as to how this night of six months is to be interpreted, --- it might mean the night-time of the whole year, which, if added together, would represent the period; but it shows so far that the motion of the heavenly bodies was connected with the symbolism of the Circular Dance.*

*) _Prem Ságar_, chap. 34.

*) The following from _The Institutes of Vishnu_, 20. 1-3 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 7. p. 77), expresses a similar idea about the year: "The northern progress of the sun is a day with the gods. The southern progress of the sun is [with them] a night. A year with them is a day and a night." Compare this with what is said further on about the _Sattras_.

# Chapter 5. --- The Solar Origin.

Before going on to other systems it may be as well, when leaving the Brahmanical and Buddhist aspects of the subject, to say something about the origin of the various forms of circular movements that have been described as belonging to them. The origin of other systems must be left to depend upon the evidence that may chance to have come down from the past along with the rites or customs that have survived. In the case of the Brahmanical and Buddhist rites, the data appear to be strong and ample enough, and will, I think, leave no doubt in the mind of any one who cares to give the matter sufficient attention. The origin of the wheel has already been speculated upon, unfortunately, I have to admit, in some of its aspects not quite successfully, but then that symbol was only a secondary development. We have now to produce the primal idea that led to all the turning ceremonies that appear to have been practised by the people of India; and which are so ancient that it would be a waste of time, in the present condition of our knowledge, to attempt the task of tracing them back to their first commencement. In all probability the Aryans carried the idea with them when they came into the land of the Five Rivers. This I am inclined to accept, but doubts about it will be found further on. But these rotatory movements were so universally practised --- as will be shown --- it is quite possible that they were also among the customs of the pre-Aryan population of India, --- a people that we are now beginning to discover were far from being an uncivilised race. However, the motive for showing the solar character of these rites in the Far East is the interest they will give to similar rites and customs here in the Far West, particularly in relation to the circular movement known as deisul among the Celts, a well-known custom which was constantly practised, more particularly in the Highlands of Scotland, down almost to our own day. Deisul was to move round "in the course of the sun," and this was done for any good object, and was associated with the idea of "luck"; while _Widdershins_ was the going against the sun, and that was consequently unlucky, or the cause of evil. It may be presumed that it will add to the interest if it can be shown that there were also notions somewhat similar in India, associated with the backward movement of the sun.

When I wrote the short article which appeared in _Good Words_ --- now more than a quarter of a century ago --- I adopted the theory of a solar origin. I had at that time but a small amount of data to go upon, but the conclusion has since been amply confirmed, as I hope to show. To this it may be added that others who have given some study to the subject have also declared that this theory is the right one. As the subject may be said to be a comparatively new one, and few, even among reading men, can be expected to be familiar with it, I shall produce the judgments of some of these.

M. Henri Gaidoz --- although his work has no pretension beyond its title, _Études de Mythologie Gauloise_, yet it is evident that his knowledge is not limited to the north-west of Europe --- gives a passing notice of "La Roue dans l'Inde," in which the solar origin is assumed. His views may be easily inferred from the following words, in which he states that "nombreux passages du _Rig-véda_ parlent de la roue de Surya ou de Svar, la roue de Soleil."* M. É. Senart, who is a Sanscrit scholar of repute, is equally decided in his words. Writing on the word Chakravartin, he says: "Il n'était pas besoin d'une indication si précise pour nous faire reconnaître dans le Roi de la roue le possesseur du disque céleste, le souverain de l'espace, le Soleil enfin, réalisé en un type tout populaire."* Many other passages will be found in Senart's _Essai_ supporting the idea that the wheel is solar. Sir Alexander Cunningham says that "the wheel was one of the most common and obvious emblems of the sun."* I have already quoted Dr. Edkins who says that "all praying-wheels turn in the direction in which the sun moves."

*) P. 11. The word _Surya_, it may be explained, is the Sanscrit for 'sun.'

*) _Essai sur la Légende du Buddha_, p. 47.

*) _Bhilsa Topes_, p. 353. Professor Max Müller in his _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 283, gives one of the hymns from the Rig-Veda, in which it is said about Indra, that "he drove forth the wheel of the sun." 4. 17, 14.

Before going into further details of the solar origin I shall give an extract from Professor Max Müller's exposition of the word _Rita_ in his _Hibbert Lectures_. What the professor says reads to me as if it were almost an essay on the wheel and other circular movements. Many of the words and phrases that are used in reference to Rita will be found in what is here written about the rotatory ceremonies. However, my main object is to show that in this word all the main ideas existed in India, at an early period, which formed the basis of the rites; and this, it seems to me, is a very strong position to have established in the process of investigation. "_Ri_ta, I believe, was used originally to express the settled movement of the sun, and of all the heavenly bodies. It is a participle of the verb _Ri_, which may convey the sense either of joined, fitted, fixed; or of gone, going, the path followed in going. I myself prefer the second derivation, and I recognise the same root in another word, Nir-_ri_ti, literally going away, then decay, destruction, death, also the place of destruction, the abyss, and in later times [like An_ri_ta], the mother of Naraka, or hell. The going, the procession, the great daily movement, or path followed every day by the sun from his rising to his setting, followed also by the dawn, by day and night, and their various representatives, a path which the powers of night and darkness could never impede, would soon be regarded as the right movement, the good work, the straight path. It was not, however, so much the daily movement, or the path which it followed, as the original direction which determined it, the settled point from which it started and to which it returned, that became most prominent in the thoughts of the Vedic poets when speaking of _Ri_ta. Hence they speak of the path of _Ri_ta, which we can only translate by the right path; but which to them was the path determined by that unknown power which they had tried to grasp by the name of Rita. If you remember how Aditi, the boundless, was at first meant for the east, which every morning seemed to reveal an endless distance beyond the sky from which the sun arose for his daily course, you will not be surprised to find that the _Ri_ta, the place or the power which determines the path of the sun, should occasionally in the Veda take the place of Aditi. As the dawn was called the face of Aditi, we find that the sun is called the bright face of _Ri_ta*; nay, we find invocations in which the great _Ri_ta* occupies a place next to Aditi, and heaven and earth... The path of _Ri_ta is sometimes spoken of as the path which King Varuna, one of the oldest Vedic gods, made for the sun to follow. We thus begin to understand why what in some places is called the law of Varuna, is in others called the law of _Ri_ta... Later on, _Ri_ta, like Satya, the true, is conceived as the eternal foundation of all that exists... At last _Ri_ta assumed the meaning of law in general... As Rita came to express all that is right, good, and true, so An_ri_ta was used to express whatever is false, evil, and untrue."*

From this long quotation, --- and its close correspondence with the words of Plato, in _The Laws_, is remarkable, --- it will be seen that as early as the time of the Vedas --- and it should be remembered that the ideas in such books are generally much older than the books themselves --- the movement or path of the sun had become the type of the "right movement," the "right path"; it "came to express all that is right, good, and true." It also meant "law," and at last "assumed the meaning of law in general." If it is "conceived as the eternal foundation of all that exists," in this last we are enabled to understand the interpretation of _Dharmachakra-pravartana_ --- "Setting in motion the Wheel of the Law" --- how it became the "Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness." We have also the basis of the Widdershin notion, that what was not according to the path of the sun was "false, evil, and untrue." It also meant "decay, destruction," and "death," as well as the place where the wicked are supposed to go. If the learned professor had substituted the word wheel instead of _Rita_, almost every attribute he attaches to the one might have been ascribed to the other.

*) _Rig-veda_, 6. 51. 1.

*) _Ibid._ 10. 66. 4.

*) _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 239-44.

M. Senart expresses a somewhat similar idea to that which is given so fully above. He is writing on the Chakravartin, or Wheel-King, and on "Le Soleil comme type de la royauté"; he says: "Il est aisé de comprendre que le dieu solaire ait pu considéré comme un roi céleste, puis comme un représentant de la souverainté universelle et absolue; son unité, sa régularité inaltérable, le destinaient particulièrement à ce rôle."*

It will now complete what appears to me as the proof of the solar origin to show from texts in the old sacred books of India that the turning movements of ancient ritual had a reference to the sun's path. These texts luckily are plentiful enough. The _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, which is wholly a book of ritual, and the _Grihya-Sûtras_, or Domestic Rites, supply numerous instances of the performance of pradakshinas. It may be explained that when the words "from left to right" are employed, it means going round with the right side to the centre; and that meant the sun's course. A number of references have already been given which describe the pradakshina as being performed with the right to the object that is circumambulated; and the following occurs in one of the sacrificial ceremonies described in the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_: "Then they [the sacrificer and priests] again walk round thrice sunwise beating their right thighs, with the same text. As to why they again walk round thrice sunwise, they think, 'Sunwise this sacred work of ours shall be accomplished,' and therefore they again walk thrice round sunwise."*

*) _Essai_, p. 60. The following from the same work has an interest in relation to this point: "Dans le Lalita Vistara (p. 28, l. 12), 'famille issue des rois cakravartins' est synonyme de 'famille de la race solaire,'" p. 48.

In another rite the performance is thus described:--- "He then turns [from left to right] with the text [_Vâj. S._ 2. 267], 'I move along the course of the sun'; having reached that final goal, that safe resort, he now moves along the course of the sun]."*

The next extract is from the ceremony of initiating a young Brahman when he begins the life of a student, and it refers to the cord worn at the ceremony. It is made of hemp, a triple cord, and it is ordered to be plaited like a braid of hair; but it is the reason given for this which contains the point that is under consideration: "For were it to be twisted sunwise [from left to right] as any other cords, it would be human; and were it twisted contrary to the course of the sun, it would be sacred to the Fathers; hence it is plaited after the manner of a braid of hair."* Other cords it will be noticed are twisted "sunwise."

The _Grihya-Sûtras_ in describing the initiation of a young Brahman give the details of the pradakshina that is practised. It is the teacher that appears from the text to perform it in the present case. "'In Indra's course I move, in the sun's course I move after him'; with these words he turns round from left to right."* In the next it seems to be the teacher that makes the student to turn, --- "With [the formula], 'Move in the sun's course,' he should make him turn round from left to right."* The next is almost in the same words. "He then makes him turn round from left to right with [the formula], 'Move in the sun's course after him.'"* It should not be overlooked that the moving in the sun's course is stated to be a "formula," showing the established character of the words.

*) 2. 6. 2. 15 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 12. p. 442).

*) _Ibid._ 1. 9. 3. 17 (p. 272).

*) _Ibid._ 3. 2. 1. 13 (vol. 26. p. 29).

These quotations speak for themselves, and require no comment. They show that centuries before Buddhism appeared the solar symbolism of these turning movements had been recognised. The quotations just given apply to the pradakshina; but, at the same time, they can scarcely leave a doubt, even if we had no other evidence, that the wheel had the same symbolism. M. Senart insists on the solar character of the wheel in relation to the Chakravartin; and I have already given what Professor Eggeling has written, where he quotes Sâyana that, when the Brahman sat on the wheel singing the hymn from the _Sâma Veda_, it was "turned round thrice in a sunwise motion." I have no direct evidence that the Tibetan wheels, or cylinders, are considered to be turned to represent the course of the sun; but, as the Buddhists borrowed the wheel from the Brahmans, we may be all but certain that they also borrowed the symbolism that belonged to it. This much I can speak of from my own knowledge, that the Lamas at the present day turn the wheel in the same direction that a person would turn, if he kept his right side to the centre; and that we have seen, from the passages given above, was moving in the sun's course.*

*) _Sânkhâyana-Grihya-Sûtra_, 2. 3. 2 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 64).

*) _Khâdira-Grihya-Sûtra_, 2. 4. 14 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 401).

*) _Grihya-Sûtra_ of Gobhila, 2. 10. 27 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 30. p. 66).

There is another piece of evidence, which, although not quite so direct, is still in keeping with what has been produced. That is in the discus or chakra of Vishnu. The question as to how the wheel, in this case, became a thunderbolt and a warlike weapon, need not be considered at the moment, as it will find a more suitable place further on in these pages. The chakra in this case does not appear, either in the description of it or in sculptures, as a wheel; it is simply a discus, formed like a quoit, but the authorities, so far as I know, identify it with the dharmachakra. It is known the Sudarsana-Chakra, (Fig. 17) and Râjendralâla Mitra says it "is the counterpart of the Wheel of the Law, the Dharmachakra of the Buddhists."* The origin of this symbol forms a curious myth. Viswa Karma, who is the celestial architect, or the demiurgus of the Hindu pantheon, placed the sun in his lathe, and cut away an eighth part of it; from the parings he fashioned the chakra of Vishnu. The authority just quoted gives another account as to how it was produced. This is from the _Padma Purāna_, which says that it was prepared by Vishnu himself from the essence of the sun-god Súrya.* Even in these myths it will be observed that the solar origin is retained. According to the _Vâmana Purāna_, this wheel had twelve spokes which represented the twelve months of the year, the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and to each spoke there was also assigned a deity.* In this the yearly solar orbit is evidently meant.

[Fig. 17. --- The Sudarsana-Chakra at Puri. From Râjendralâla Mitra's _Antiquities of Orissa_.]()

*) See Additional Notes for a reference to the Bonpas of Tibet, who are non-Buddhist, and they make circuits with the left to the centre. It was after I had written about Tibet and India that I chanced, in reading, upon the passage referring to them.

*) _Antiquities of Orissa_, vol. 2. p. 125.

*) _Antiquities of Orissa_, vol. 2. p. 125. 

*) _Ibid._ The account of the _Sudarsana-Chakra_, at Puri, as it is recorded by Râjendralâla Mitra, should not be overlooked. According to this authority, Jagannatha (Juggernath) is a form of Vishnu, or Krishna, and the worship is derived from Buddhism. The figures of Jagannatha, Balabhadra, his brother, and Subhadra, the sister, have now been shown to be only rude copies of the well-known Buddhist emblem, the trisula, or trident, which appears so frequently on Buddhist sculptures. These three figures are placed on the throne in the sanctuary of the temple at Puri, and along with them on the throne is the Sudarsana-Chakra, which the _Purushottama Máhátmya_ affirms is of equal rank with the other three images. As this is a known Buddhist symbol, the finding of it along with the others is considered as a strong confirmation of the theory that the temple had been originally one devoted to Buddhism. The curious point connected with this chakra is that it is not a wheel. The object is described as "a mere stump," eighty-four yavas --- barley-corns --- in length, or about six feet (see Fig. 17). It is slightly carved in a checked pattern, and the priests of the temple say that a wheel-mark is stamped on the top of it. Râjendralâla Mitra says he could not see such a mark upon it anywhere. It appeared to him "as if it were the staff on which, in Buddhist times, a regular wheel was mounted, but which has since somehow disappeared." With our knowledge now, derived from the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, of a wheel in a horizontal position being turned on the top of a post, it is just possible that this "mere stump" may have served for this purpose. Its pointed top would have suited for the turning, but not for placing a wheel vertically on it, as we see them represented in the Buddhist sculptures.  
Since the above was written I have seen an illustration of a brass chakra, found in the Krishna district, Madras Presidency, during some late explorations among Buddhist remains, by Mr. Rea of the Archæological Department, of which I give a copy (Fig. 18). It is five and a quarter inches in height. Along with it was found a trisula of the same size, and with a similar stand or "handgrasp," as Mr. Rea calls it. Here we have a repetition of the wheel on the top of a post, repeating the form suggested in relation to the Sudarsana-Chakra. But it was probably also held in the hand at some parts of the service as the trisula is, and as the dorjé is by the Lamas. This might possibly imply that the holding of this wheel in the hand would be the equivalent of turning the wheel by the Lamas, If this should be the case, it may turn out to be an important link by which the Tibetan praying-wheel may yet have its origin traced out.

[Fig. 18.--- Chakra, of brass. Found at Ghantasala, Krishna District, Madras Pres. From _South Indian Antiquities_, New Imperial Series, by Alexr. Rea, M. R. A. S., Madras, 1894. Pl. 33. p. 42.]()

The theory of a solar origin finds a still further support in another aspect of the subject which comes now to be considered. That is the evil signification of movements which are the opposite of the sun's course; or of movements which are in the direction of what was considered to be the backward movement of the sun. These have a sufficient interest in themselves in relation to the Indian systems, but they have also an additional interest in relation to European practices, and more particularly when they are compared to the "Widdershins" of the Celts.

It is natural to suppose that if a particular line of action is assumed to be good, its opposite is likely to be looked upon as bad. In the ancient sacrificial system of India, when some of the ceremonies extended over days, weeks, months, and some of them even took years to complete their celebrations, a single word wrongly pronounced or omitted invalidated the whole rite, and it had all to be performed over again. When notions so rigid as these prevailed, it is not difficult to understand how the complete reversal of a rite would be regarded.

I have no direct or authoritative evidence about the Lamas and their turning cylinders; but I have always understood that to reverse the motion was an evil thing; or that it undid any merit that had been accumulated by those who had performed the proper movement. When Buddha set "the supreme wheel of the empire of truth" in motion at Benares --- which has been already referred to --- "the gods in the highest heaven of heavens gave forth the shout, saying, 'That wheel which not by any Samana or Brâhman, not by any god, not by any Brahma or Mâra, not by any one in the universe, can ever be turned back.'"* Here it is not that it might be stopped in its motion that is declared, but that it shall not be "turned back"; this would be the opposite of the sun's course. It would not do to assume as a certainty that the interpretation here suggested is the only one that the words will admit of, but when it is shown that the movement opposite to the sun's course is to be avoided as something evil, we have a strong probability in its favour.

It will be necessary to explain the peculiar way in which the Brahmanical system viewed the solar motion, and how they arrived at the idea of evil in the course that was opposite to that of the sun. In this I cannot, in the first place, do better than quote from Dr. Haug. He says: "...The proper time of commencing and ending their sacrifices, principally the so-called _Sattras_, or sacrificial sessions, could not be known without an accurate knowledge of the time of the sun's northern and southern progress. The knowledge of the calendar forms such an essential part of the ritual that many important conditions of the latter cannot be carried out without the former. The sacrifices are allowed to commence only at certain lucky constellations and in certain months; so, for instance, as a rule, no great sacrifice can commence during the sun's southern progress (_dakshinâyana_); for this is regarded up to the present day as an unlucky period for the Brâhmans, in which even to die is believed to be a misfortune. The great sacrifices take place generally in spring, in the months _Chaitra_ and _Vaisâkha_ [April and May]. The Sattras, which lasted for a year, were, as one may learn from a careful perusal of the fourth book of the _Aitareya-Brâhmana_, nothing but an imitation of the sun's yearly course. They were divided into two distinct parts, each consisting of six months of thirty days each; in the midst of both was the Vishuvan, _i. e._ the equator or central day, cutting the whole Sattra into two halves. The ceremonies were in both the halves exactly the same; but they were in the latter half in an inverted order. This represents the increase of the days in northern and their decrease in the southern progress; for both the increase and decrease take place in the same proportions."* This goes so far as an explanation, but not quite the whole way. The Sattras, it should be noticed, are an imitation of the sun's yearly course. They are divided into two distinct parts of six months each, the one half is the movement of the sun to the south, and the other is the movement northwards.* To this it must be added that the quarters, or regions, mean the cardinal points of the compass, to which gods and various attributes have been assigned. The south is Yama's quarter; now Yama is the god of the dead, and his region is that of the Pitris or the Fathers, which means that it is the quarter of the dead. A Brâhmana of the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_ gives a rather lengthened explanation of this; how the spring, the summer, and the rains represent the gods, and the autumn and winter the Fathers. It contains the following: "Now when he [the sun] moves northwards, then he is among the gods, he guards the gods; and when he moves southwards, then he is among the fathers, then he guards the fathers."* When the sun was coming from the south the time was lucky, when going south it was unlucky.* The region of the dead was associated with evil, and the opposite was good. The placing of the dead, with this system, in the south, will naturally recall the _Amenti_ of the Egyptian system, which was in the west. Although so different in one respect, yet they agree in a striking way from both being related to the solar motion; the one from the sun descending in the west, and the other from its moving downwards towards the south. In both the sun was supposed to have died, or at least to have lost his fertilising energy, which was his beneficent power --- the power by which every good came to man. It is not likely that this idea could have originated in India; it was in all probability brought into the south by the Aryans from a colder latitude, where frost and snow made the winter a time of evil, and the summer a period of good. In that region, wherever it may have been, the sun would also descend farther to the south in the winter than it does in the land of the Seven Rivers.

*) _Dhamma-kakka-ppavattana-Sutta_, 27 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 11. p. 154).

*) Introduction to the _Aitareya-Brâhmana_, by Dr. Martin Haug, pp. 46., 47.

*) See quotation, p. 86, note 2, from _Institutes of Vishnu_, where it is stated that the northern progress of the sun is a day with the gods, and the southern progress is a night.

*) _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, 2. 1. 3. 3 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 12. p. 289).

*) "During the northern course of the sun, at the time of the increasing moon, on auspicious days, before noon; this is the time at which the constellations are lucky," _Khadira-Grihya-Sûttra_, 2. 1. 3. 4 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 374).

The first quotation is one that illustrates what has already been written about the south. A thousand years before our era, and probably long before that time, sacrifices were performed, some of which lasted for long periods of time. The temple, if the place may be so called, was a space of ground covered in with thatch and mats made from reeds or grass, supported on wooden posts. The _Satapatha-Brâhmana_ gives minute directions about the selection of the ground; and amongst the rules is the following: the ground "should rise somewhat towards the south, that being the quarter of the Fathers. Were it to incline towards the south, the sacrificer would quickly go to yonder world; but in this way the sacrificer lives long: let it then rise somewhat towards the south."*

The next extract will show the rule when the pradakshina is to be made contrary to the course of the sun; it is taken from the directions for performing a _pitriyajna_, or sacrifice to the Manes. Usually the Brahmanical cord is worn over the left shoulder, but in this case the rule is reversed, and it is worn over the right. "...He moves thrice round from right to left, spreading the sacrificial grass all over [the altar]." Having gone thus round the altar, from right to left, "he then moves again thrice round [the altar] from left to right. The reason why he again moves thrice round from left to right, is that, while the first time he went away from here after those three ancestors of his, he now comes back again from them to this, his own world; that is why he again moves thrice round from left to right." The rule and the explanation of it are here clearly stated; there is no mention of the sun's course, but it has been shown before that going from left to right was considered to be sunwise, and the opposite is of course against the sun.

*) 3. 1. 1. 2 (Sacred Books of the East, vol xxvi. p. 2).

*) _Ibid._ 2. 6. 1. 15 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 12. p. 425).

A quotation from the same _Brâhmana_ has been given describing the sacrificer and priests making a pradakshina sunwise, and beating their right thighs; but immediately before that is another where they "walk thrice round the altar not sunwise, beating their left thighs."* The paragraph does not make it quite clear why the movement was "not sunwise," but one of the desires expressed at the doing of the ceremony is, that the sacrificer may be "severed from death, not from immortality," so the object may be the propitiation of the power of death; but against this is the fact that Tryambaka, a form of Siva, is the deity invoked. This performance was followed by them going round sunwise, which has been already referred to.

According to the _Âsvalâyana-Grihya-Sûtra_, when the dead body has been carried to the burning-place, "the performer [of the rites] walks three times round the spot with his left side turned towards it."* Again, when the bones that have been left after the burning have to be gathered, "the performers of the ceremony walk three times round the spot with their left side turned towards it."*

The following is from a book on Indian life published a few years ago. The account about to be quoted is suggestive in many ways in connection with the subject of these pages. The main object of giving it here is to show that the idea of the wheel still survives in India, and that evil can be produced by turning it the opposite way to the sun's course. The writer is conveying some notion of Indian bazaars, and he says that the people believe that the _Bunneahs_, or shopkeepers, can by magical arts produce an influence on the weather, and that they keep away the rain so as to raise the price of corn. One of the informants told the author that "a Bunneah had recourse to a still more effectual method of keeping off the rain. He had a _chukra_, or spinning-wheel, made out of the bones of dead men. Such an article could only be made very secretly and for a large sum of money, but its action was most potent. Whenever the clouds were gathering the Bunneah set his virgin daughter to work the chukra the _reverse way_, and by that means unwound or unwove the clouds, as it were, thus driving away the rain; and this over and over again, notwithstanding that the young Hindu maidens had gone forth, harnessed themselves to the plough, and with suitable ceremonies and offerings had invoked the gods for rain; while the Mohammedans, on their part, had assembled in the Musjid and offered prayers to Allah for the much-needed showers."* The italics are in the original from which I copy. It is rather difficult to imagine that this wild conception of a wheel in the minds of these people is not a survival of the use of wheels that could be turned, and yet the difficulty is as great if we attempt to account for it otherwise. There is not only the idea of the wheel existing in their minds, but also at the same time of the two ways of turning it. The "_reverse way_" implies that they possess the supposition of the right way.

*) _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, 2. 6. 2. 12 (p. 441).

*) 4. 2. 10 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. 29. p. 238).

*) _Ibid._ 4. 5. 4. (p. 245).

*) _Indian Life, Religious and Social_, by John Campbell Oman, p. 274.

# Chapter 6. --- The Swastika.

The _Swastika_ may also be called one of the universal symbols --- meaning by that title that it is found, like the wheel, almost everywhere --- and it might have been treated upon in almost any part of this work. It is now pretty generally known by its Indian name. From this, and the frequency of its occurrence in India, both in the past and the present, the symbol, perhaps, had better be dealt with here. Of the theories which have until lately been suggested to account for the Swastika, two only need be referred to. The symbol was at first from its form assumed to be a cross, and in France it is generally spoken of as the "Croix gammée." The other theory was that it is the _Arani_, or two pieces of wood from which the sacred fire was churned in the _Agny-âdnâna_, or ceremony of establishing the sacrificial fires. The theory which is now accepted, and which justifies the introduction of the subject here, is that the Swastika is only another form of the wheel, and a symbol of the solar motion.

I shall here give, so far as references I chance to have will enable me to do so, the steps by which this conclusion was reached. The late Mr. Edward Thomas, who was one of the first authorities on Indian coins, reprinted "from the _Numismatic Chronicle_ a paper on 'The Indian Swastika and its Western Counterparts.' The Swastika is the Indian name for the so-called mystic cross, which corresponds to the well-known three legs of the Isle of Man. This symbol is traced by Mr. Thomas on Chaldean bricks, on Buddhist temples, on the whorls dug up by Dr. Schliemann at Hissarlik, and on the coins of Syracuse. Mr. Thomas's theory of its meaning may be given in his own words: 'So far as I have been able to trace or connect the various manifestations of this emblem, they one and all resolve themselves into the primitive conception of the solar motion, which was intuitively associated with the rolling or wheel-like projection of the sun through the upper or visible arc of the heavens, as understood and accepted in the crude astronomy of the ancients.' In a note, Mr. Thomas acknowledges that this explanation has been to some extent anticipated by Ludwig Müller of Copenhagen."*

In 1891 Count Goblet d'Alviella published his very excellent work on _La Migration des Symboles_, in which he advocates the solar significance of the Swastika, and, as one strong evidence, he was able to bring forward the curious discovery made by Professor Percy Gardner, that on the coins of Mesembria in Thrace, the name of the town was expressed by ΜΕΣ卍, in which the Swastika represents the latter half of the word. As the Greek name, Μεσημβρία, is "Town of Mid-day," the Swastika evidently means "day," which it is in this case supposed to represent by its solar character. A review of Count d'Alviella's book in the _Athenaeum_ led to Professor Max Müller sending the following communication to the same journal:--- "13th August 1892. The discovery made by Professor Percy Gardner, to which you refer in the _Athenaeum_ of last week, that the name of the town of Mesembria, the city of mid-day, is figured on some of its coins by ΜΕΣ卍, is decisive, no doubt, as to the meaning of the so-called Svastika in Greece. An equally decisive discovery, however, was made some years ago by the late E. Thomas, who, in his paper on the 'Indian Svastika and its Western Counterparts,' published in the _Numismatic Chronicle_ in 1880, vol. 20. pp. 18-48, showed that the emblem of the sun in motion, a wheel with spokes, was actually replaced by what we now call the Svastika; that the Svastika is, in fact, an abbreviated emblem of the solar wheel with spokes in it, the tire and the movement being indicated by the crampons. He showed that on some of the Andhra coins, and likewise on some punched gold coins depicted in Sir Walter Elliot's plate 9. (_Madras Journal of Lit. and Science_, vol. 3.), the place of the more definite figure of the sun is actually taken by the Svastika, and the same Svastika has also sometimes been inscribed within rings or normal circles representing the four suns on Ujjain patterns or coins.* Mr. Thomas has also pointed out that in the long list of the recognised devices of the twenty-four Gaina Tîrthankâras the sun is absent, but that while the eighth Tîrthankâra has the sign of the half-moon, the seventh Tîrthankâra is marked with the Svastika. Very full information on the migration of the Svastika is found in R. P. Greg's _On the Meaning and Origin of the Fylfot and Swastika_, 1884"* (F. Max Müller).

*) _The Academy_, 24th July 1880.

*) The four Swastikas here described may be seen in plate 31., Fig. 3, of Cunningham's _Bhilsa Topes_.

*) _Athenaeum_, 20th August 1892. See Additional Notes for a further communication of Professor Max Müller's on the _Svastika_.

The frontispiece of Count Goblet d'Alviella's book presents another evidence of the solar symbolism of the Swastika. It is a representation of Apollo in his car with four horses, taken from an antique vase in the Kunsthistorisches Museum of Vienna. In the middle of the god's breast a Swastika is represented. It is large, and the most prominent thing upon the figure of Apollo (see Fig. 19).

Supposing that this explanation should hold its ground as the true meaning of the Swastika, I do not see that the two previous theories need be altogether given up. The pre-Christian cross is now assumed by some writers to have represented the four cardinal points. The sculptured crosses in Mexico have had this meaning traced out regarding them. It is also evident from what has been said about the pradakshina, that the cardinal points, or the "quarters," were, in India, closely connected with the circular movements. It has also been pointed out that the spokes in most of the wheels in the Buddhist sculptures were multiples of four, and that that number probably had reference to the quarters. Indeed, this would only be carrying out a little further Professor Max Müller's explanation of the origin of the Swastika, where he identifies the cross as four of the spokes, and the crampons as part of the tire.

[Fig. 19. --- Apollo with Swastika. On an Antique Vase in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.]()

As to the other, that it was the instrument for churning the fire of the sacrifices, which also means that it was the "lucifer" of the primitive man, it would be difficult to imagine that when rotatory movements in imitation of the sun, the great source of light and heat, had been practised, the people who did so, would not, we may be almost certain, identify the turning process of the sticks as only another form of the rites they had adopted. If a cart-wheel, because it turned, was a symbol of the solar movement, how much more appropriate as a symbol must that instrument have been that produced heat and light in its turning. According to the _Satapatha-Brâhmana_, we can make out so far that it had a symbolism similar to that of the sun attached to it. The churning to produce the fire by the sacrificer was not to be done till after the sun had risen. The sun in its rising dispels evils, even evils from the gods; this is the reason given in the _Brâhmana_, and the result is stated: "The gods are bliss, and bliss he obtains; the gods are glorious, and glorious he will be, whosoever, knowing this, churns [the fire] after the rising of the Sun."* There may be other passages of the same kind in the old sacred books, but this one goes far to give a probability to what has been suggested.

...
